1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION 
Table 1: Additionality and crediting baseline methods 
Additionality,Crediting Method and Mitigation Outcome 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
Mitigation Outcome 
Reductions and Removals 
This agricultural land management (ALM) methodology provides procedures to estimate the 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions (CO2, CH4, and N2O) and carbon dioxide removals 
(reductions and removals) resulting from the adoption of improved ALM practices. The 
methodology is compatible with regenerative agriculture and has a particular focus on 
increasing soil organic carbon (SOC) storage. 
The crediting baseline and additionality are determined via a project method (Table 1). The 
baseline scenario assumes the continuation of pre-project ALM practices. Practices in the 
baseline scenario are determined by applying a minimum three-year historical look-back period 
to produce an annual schedule of activities (i.e., tillage, planting, harvest, and fertilization 
events) for each quantification unit within the project area (e.g., for each field), to be repeated 
over the baseline period.1 Baseline emissions/stock changes are then modeled. Alternatively, 
baseline SOC stock change may be directly measured in “baseline control sites” managed 
according to pre-project practices as set out in the schedule of activities. The baseline scenario 
is re-evaluated as required by the most recent version of the VCS Standard, and revised, where 
necessary, to reflect current agricultural production in the region. 
Additionality is demonstrated by a barrier analysis and showing that the practice change 
implemented under the project activity is not common practice. A practice change constitutes 
any of the following: 
• 
Adoption of a new practice (e.g., adoption of one or more of the practices covered in the 
categories included in Applicability Condition 1); 
• 
Cessation of a pre-existing practice (e.g., stop tillage or irrigation); 
• 
Adjustment to a pre-existing practice; or  
• 
Some combination of the above.  
 
1 Project proponents must reassess ALM project baselines every ten years or every five years, where regional practice 
changes are more frequent and/or data becomes available to update the baseline. See the most recent version of the 
VCS Standard for further details on baseline reassessment requirements.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 6 
 
 
Any quantitative adjustment (e.g., decrease in fertilizer application rate) must exceed 5% of the 
pre-existing value to qualify as a practice change. 
The methodology provides three approaches to quantifying reductions and removals resulting 
from the adoption of improved ALM practices. 
Quantification Approach 1: Measure and Model – a biogeochemical, process-based model is 
used to estimate GHG fluxes related to SOC stock changes, soil methanogenesis, and use of 
nitrogen fertilizers and nitrogen-fixing species. Edaphic characteristics and actual agricultural 
practices implemented, measured initial SOC stocks, and climatic conditions in sample fields 
are used as model inputs. Periodic measurements of SOC stocks are required every five years 
at minimum (see Table 8). 
Quantification Approach 2: Measure and Re-Measure – direct measurement is used to quantify 
changes in SOC stocks. This approach is relevant where models are unavailable or have not yet 
been validated or parameterized for a particular region, crop, or practice, or where project 
proponents prefer to use a direct measurement approach for SOC stock change. Quantification 
Approach 2 directly measures SOC stock changes in the baseline scenario in linked baseline 
control sites. 
Quantification Approach 3: Default Factors – CO2 flux from fossil fuel combustion and N2O and 
CH4 fluxes, excluding CH4 flux from methanogenesis, are calculated using default emission 
factors. 
The quantification approach varies by emission/removal type. Approaches to quantification of 
contributing sources of CO2, CH4, and N2O emissions are listed in Table 5. 
Project proponents must use the templates available on the VM0042 webpage to prepare the 
documents required for project validation and verification.