4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to project activities that recover and/or collect and destroy ODS or 
HFC where the baseline scenario is the partial or total atmospheric release of ODS or HFC. 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
1) The project activity is implemented in countries that are a party to the Montreal 
Protocol, including both Article 5 and non-Article 5 countries.1 
2) The project activity destroys any of the following substances as specified in the 
Montreal Protocol for which the IPCC publishes a global warming potential (100-year 
time horizon) (see Appendix 1 for more information2): 
a) Annex A, Group I (CFCs) 
b) Annex B, Group I (other CFCs) 
c) Annex C, Group I (HCFCs) 
d) Annex F, Group I (HFCs) 
3) The substances to be destroyed come from the following sources: 
a) Refrigerants recovered from refrigeration or air conditioning cooling circuits 
b) Blowing agents contained in insulation foams from end-of-life domestic 
refrigeration appliances. The blowing agent is: 
i) extracted from the foam under negative pressure (to ensure that fugitive 
release of ODS or HFC do not occur) to a concentrated form prior to 
destruction, or 
ii) destroyed through the destruction of intact foam.  
c) Fire suppression agents recovered from fire suppression systems or equipment 
d) Propellants recovered from used or discarded aerosol cans or canisters 
 
1 Recovery and/or collection and destruction activities may take place in separate countries. 
2 While Appendix I lists pure substances, commercial blends containing a substance listed in Appendix I are also eligible. 
VM0016, v2.0 
9 
e) CFCs, HCFCs, or HFCs contained in government or privately held stockpiles  
4) All ODS and HFC are recovered and/or collected, stored, and transported in cylinders or 
other hermetically sealed containers that meet applicable technical specifications and 
safety standards. In case of intact foam, the foam is also stored, transported, and 
destroyed in sealed containers. 
5) Destruction technologies meet screening criteria set by the UNEP TEAP Task Force on 
Destruction Technologies (TFDT).3 
6) The project meets applicable destruction date requirements outlined in Section 4.1. 
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
7) The project activity destroys ODS or HFC refrigerants, blowing agents, fire suppression 
agents, or propellants that are manufactured for the sole purpose of being 
subsequently destroyed. 
8) ODS or HFC for destruction are recovered from pre-polymers. 
4.1 
Destruction Date 
Projects must comply with the following in relation to eligible destruction date, with the 
exceptions provided in Sections 4.1.1–4.1.2. Eligible destruction dates are dependent on 
whether a country produced or imported ODS and HFC.  
The Montreal Protocol ODS phaseout scenarios below exclude material produced or consumed 
for essential or critical uses, and material produced for feedstock uses. For projects in 
countries with essential use or critical use exemptions that destroy ODS, the project proponent 
must demonstrate (e.g., with formal communications to the Montreal Protocol) that the relevant 
ODS is not needed now or in the future for such uses. 
• 
For countries that only produced the relevant ODS or HFC for export: The destruction must 
not start until the final stepdown of the Montreal Protocol production phaseout for the 
relevant ODS, or phasedown for HFCs, has been completed by the country. It must also be 
demonstrated that all intended recipient countries no longer require imports of the relevant 
ODS or HFC from the source country (e.g., where exports had already ceased). 
• 
For countries that produced the relevant ODS or HFC for both domestic consumption and 
export: The destruction must not start until the final stepdown of the Montreal Protocol 
production phaseout for the relevant ODS, or phasedown for HFCs, has been completed by 
the country. It must also be demonstrated that the intended recipient country(ies) no longer 
requires imports of the relevant ODS or HFC from the source country. 
 
3 According to their most recent report. Reports available at: https://ozone.unep.org/science/assessment/teap 
VM0016, v2.0 
10 
• 
For countries that only imported the relevant ODS or HFC: The destruction must not start 
until the final stepdown of the Montreal Protocol consumption phaseout for the relevant 
ODS, which implies no further imports will occur (i.e., an import ban is in place for the 
relevant ODS), or consumption phase-down for HFCs, has been completed by the country. 
Countries that phase out an ODS in advance of its Montreal Protocol consumption phaseout 
deadline must have in place, before the destruction date, an import ban on the ODS for all uses 
except critical and essential uses. Countries that phase down an HFC in advance of its Montreal 
Protocol consumption phasedown deadline must have in place, prior to the destruction date, an 
HFC import cap that ensures consumption remains below the final HFC consumption limit. 
Note – Relevant ODS production phaseout deadlines are those of the individual substances 
and not the substance groups.  
4.1.1 HCFC Destruction Date Eligibility Exceptions 
Project proponents may source HCFC from a country (i.e. the source country) that has initiated, 
but not yet completed, a consumption (and production, where appropriate) phaseout, where at 
least one of the following applies: 
1) Stockpile of virgin material: The virgin HCFC was imported into or produced in the 
source country, prior to the date of approval of this methodology.  
2) Stockpile of recovered material: The recovered HCFC has been stored in government 
stockpiles or in the possession of a waste handler for more than one year prior to the 
destruction date. 
3) The HCFC was recovered from equipment (and not recycled or reclaimed) 
4) The HCFC was owned and held by an individual or company (not an HCFC importer or 
producer) for more than one year prior to the destruction date and consists of virgin, 
recycled, or reclaimed material. 
 
4.1.2 HFC Destruction Date Eligibility Exceptions 
HFC projects are also eligible where the HFC is sourced from a country (i.e. the source country) 
that has not yet completed a consumption (and production, where appropriate) phasedown and 
one of the following applies: 
1) The HFC was obtained from a government stockpile. 
2) The HFC was recovered from equipment or products at end of life, and the project 
proponent can demonstrate that the source country lacks reclamation infrastructure 
capacity. 
3) The HFC is contained in insulation foams. 
VM0016, v2.0 
11 
4) The country has reached both of the following: 1) a phasedown of at least 70% of the 
baseline for non-Article 5 countries (i.e., 30% or less of the baseline remaining) or at 
least 50% of the baseline for Article 5 countries (i.e., 50% or less of the baseline 
remaining) and 2) at least one of the following statements is true: 
a) The virgin HFC was imported into or produced in the source country prior to the 
date of approval of this methodology. 
b) The HFC was produced more than two years prior to acquisition by the project 
proponent and has been in the possession of a third party (e.g., building owner or 
waste handler but not producer or importer) for more than one year prior to the 
destruction date. 
c) The HFC was recovered from equipment (and not recycled or reclaimed) 
d) The HFC was owned and held by an individual or company (not an HFC importer or 
producer) for more than one year prior to the destruction date and consists of 
recycled or reclaimed material.