4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to ARR activities that establish, increase, or restore vegetative cover. 
Eligible project activities may involve direct planting, seeding, or assisted natural regeneration 
techniques, provided they lead to a measurable increase in vegetative cover. The applicability 
conditions for the area-based and census-based approaches are mutually exclusive. Each project 
activity instance must fully meet the applicability conditions of either the area-based approach or 
the census-based approach. A project may incorporate multiple instances that apply different 
approaches, provided that those instances are clearly separated by a minimum 10-meter buffer 
within the project boundary.  
4.1 
General Applicability Conditions  
The following applicability conditions must be met by all projects using this methodology (area-
based, census-based, or a combination of both approaches):  
1) Project activities increase vegetative cover.  
2) Where area-based and census-based approaches are used together, they are applied in 
non-overlapping areas defined at the project start (see Section 5 on the delineation of 
spatial boundaries to ensure non-overlap). 
3) For lands enrolled in a project, the quantification approach is selected at the project start 
date and used for the entire project crediting period.  
4) The project start date is documented as the earliest of the following: 
a) The date on which site preparation activities began; 
b) The land use change date 
5) Where projects take place on organic soils or wetlands, ARR activities are developed 
using a multiple project activity design, applying this methodology to account for 
aboveground biomass and using a Wetland Restoration and Conservation methodology 
(e.g., VM0036 Methodology for Rewetting Drained Temperate Peatlands) to account for 
other carbon pools. 
 
 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
9 
4.2 
Area-based Approach Applicability Conditions  
The following applicability conditions must be met by all projects using the area-based approach: 
1) Project activities involve direct planting activities (e.g., manual planting, broadcast 
seeding), indirect activities associated with assisted natural regeneration (e.g., liana 
cutting, weed management, or barriers that prevent animal grazing), or a combination of 
direct and indirect activities.  
2) Project proponents establish a t = 0 carbon stock estimate for all significant carbon 
pools. The method for establishing t = 0 estimates depends on the activity that initiates 
the project start date.2 
a) Where the project start date is initiated by site preparation (e.g., clearing invasive 
species), the following conditions must be met: 
i) 
Before site preparation, project proponents establish t = 0 carbon stock 
estimates for all significant carbon pools3. 
ii) To ensure accuracy, t = 0 estimates are established no more than two years 
before the start date (e.g., if the start date is 2025, plots must have been 
established no earlier than 2023). 
iii) Where plot-based measurements are not established before site preparation, 
a remote sensing-based estimate found in Section 8.2.1.2 may be used, but 
only for pre-existing woody biomass.  
Note – Remote sensing estimates are only eligible to use for estimates of pre-existing 
aboveground and belowground biomass and must not be used to establish a t = 0 estimate for 
any other carbon pool (e.g., SOC, dead wood). Where any other significant carbon pool is 
impacted during site preparation (e.g., SOC impacted due to plowing at depth greater than 25 
cm, or the removal of dead wood offsite) and a t = 0 measurement was not established, the 
project is ineligible. 
b) Where the project start date is defined by a land use change date or where the 
project start did not include site preparation that caused a significant decrease in 
carbon stocks in monitored carbon pools (e.g., pit planting without clearing existing 
vegetation) the following conditions must be met: 
i) 
The project proponent establishes t = 0 estimates within two years after the 
project start date (e.g., if the start date is 2025, plots must be established by 
2027). 
 
2 Establishment of project plots does not constitute the project start date. 
3 This includes allowing the removal of dead wood offsite as long as a t=0 measurement is established and the removal is 
accounted for as an immediate project emission.  
 
VM0047, v1.1 
10 
ii) Plot-based sampling occurs for all significant carbon pools.  
iii) Evidence is provided to demonstrate that site preparation did not involve 
clearing, burning, or mechanical disturbance of existing vegetation that would 
significantly reduce monitored carbon pools. Evidence may include, but is not 
limited to, georeferenced photos, field survey data, satellite imagery, and 
signed attestations from landowners. 
3) Leakage must be monitored and quantified using VMD0054. It must not be assumed to 
be de minimis.  
4.3 
Census-based Approach Applicability Conditions 
The following applicability conditions must be met by all projects using the census-based 
approach: 
1) The project activity only includes direct planting. 
2) The pre-project land use is maintained throughout the project lifetime (e.g., where 
projects occur on agricultural land, agricultural production continues). 
3) Planting density does not exceed 50 planting units per hectare. The planting density limit 
applies proportionally to the size of each instance:  
a) Where an instance is less than one hectare or includes part of a hectare (e.g., 0.50 
ha or 1.50 ha, respectively), the planting density is scaled proportionally to the size 
of the instance. For example, an instance of 0.50 hectares may include no more 
than 25 planting units.  
b) In instances larger than one hectare, planting is dispersed to maintain compliance 
with the 50 planting units per hectare limit across the entire instance (e.g., in a 10-
hectare instance, up to 500 planting units may be planted, but must not be 
concentrated in a single hectare or portion of the instance).  
4) The establishment of a complete census of all planting units marks the start of the 
project and is t = 0. The census is conducted to establish N, the total number of planting 
units. Only planting units planted by the project proponent are included in the census. 
Existing vegetation is not included in the census and does not count toward the 50 
planting units per hectare density threshold. 
5) Where planting units have died, plantings may be replanted provided N does not exceed 
50 live planting units per hectare established by the project activity.  
6) Individual planting units of woody biomass are clearly defined (e.g., tree, shrub, bamboo 
clump) and identifiable in the field. One of the following identification approaches must 
be used:  
 
VM0047, v1.1 
11 
a) GPS points: Project proponents must ensure that the spacing between individual 
planting units is greater than or equal to the positional accuracy of the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) units used for geolocating each planting unit. For example, 
if the positional accuracy of the GPS is five meters, the minimum spacing between 
planting units must be greater than or equal to five meters. 
b) Physical markers: Each planting unit must be marked with a durable, in-field 
physical identifier bearing a unique ID. These markers must be clearly visible and 
easily located during verification activities. 
7) Where a planting unit cannot be located during a monitoring event, it is conservatively 
assumed that the planting unit has died.  
8) The project activity occurs:  
a) within an area with less than 10% pre-existing woody biomass cover; and/or 
b) in an area subject to continuous cropping,4 or in “settlements” or “other lands” land 
use categories.5  
9) Soil disturbance from project activities6 (e.g., site preparation) meets the following 
conditions: 
a) Soil disturbance is permitted only at the time of planting. Where replanting or 
additional waves of planting occur, soil disturbance is permitted under the same 
conditions. 
b) Planting techniques that cause localized soil disturbance, such as pit planting, may 
exceed a depth of 25 cm. 
c) Where planting involves soil inversion (e.g., plowing), the depth must not exceed 25 
cm (such as that caused by a moldboard plow) and may only occur once during the 
project crediting period.7  
 
 
4 Cultivation of an agricultural crop on the same site year after year, without any periods of fallow exceeding one season, 
demonstrated over 10 or more years prior to the project start date. 
5 Land use category as defined by the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Volume 4, Chapter 3. 
6 In accordance with Section 4.3(2) above, the pre-project land use must be maintained throughout the project lifetime. 
Plowing and other soil disturbance may continue as part of ongoing land use activities (e.g., agricultural production) where 
they are not associated with the project activity. Only soil disturbance directly related to ARR activities is subject to the 
restrictions outlined in Section 4.3(9). 
7 Where a census-based project occurs on lands used for agriculture or other purposes where soil inversion is required, soil 
inversion for purposes other than planting trees may continue and would not be considered part of the project activity.  
 
VM0047, v1.1 
12 
4.4 
Exclusion Conditions 
The conditions specified below highlight eligibility conditions where clarification is often needed. 
These exclusion conditions are not exhaustive. Project proponents are responsible for ensuring 
full compliance with all VCS Program rules and requirements in addition to respecting the 
exclusion conditions. For example, where projects take place on land that was degraded within 
10 years of the project start date, exclusion conditions are specified in Section 3.19 of the VCS 
Standard, v4.7.8 
4.4.1 Area-based Approach Exclusions 
This methodology is not applicable for projects using the area-based approach under the 
following conditions: 
1) The project occurs on lands that have met the definition of managed forest at any point 
in the 10-year period immediately preceding the project start date.  
2) Clearing of pre-existing woody biomass involves timber harvesting or results in 
degradation of native ecosystems.   
3) The project is planting fewer than 50 planting units per hectare and could use the 
census-based approach. 
4.4.2 Census-based Approach Exclusions 
This methodology is not applicable for projects using the census-based approach under the 
following conditions: 
1) Woody biomass, which serves a similar purpose as the planting units in the project, has 
been removed within the last 10 years (confirmed via pre-project photos and/or 
attestation). 
2) Soil disturbance from the project activity involves soil inversion to a depth exceeding 25 
cm (e.g., that would result from a moldboard plow).