8 QUANTIFICATION OF GHG EMISSION 
REDUCTIONS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
8.1.1 General Procedures 
The same procedure for quantifying emissions and carbon stocks must be followed ex ante and 
ex post. For parameters monitored after project initiation, guidance is given in the parameter 
tables of the relevant modules for the values that must be used in ex ante calculations. 
The baseline of the project activity is estimated ex ante. Ex ante baseline estimations are used in 
the ex ante and ex post estimation of net carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emission 
reductions. 
The relevant activity modules (e.g., AUDef) provide methods for estimating net baseline carbon 
stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions. 
8.1.2 Baseline Reassessment and Transition to VM0048 
Where projects have verified using VM0009 prior to their transition to VM0048, project 
proponents must follow the provisions set out in VM0009 to revise the baseline emissions model 
(see Section 6.20 of VM0009, v3.0 or equivalent section in the most recent version of the 
methodology). 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
12 
Where, after baseline reevaluation, the revised baseline emissions model predicts fewer GHG 
emission reductions than VCUs issued under the previous model, the project must compensate 
for this difference by one of the following methods:  
1) Cancelation of VCUs from the project in the project proponent’s Verra Registry account 
that have not been used for offsetting purposes (“active VCUs”), or of already issued 
active VCUs where the project proponent gains the consent of the current owner, 
and/or 
2) Replacement of the emission reductions through immediate cancelation from 
subsequent issuances of VCUs to the project. The deduction may be distributed over 
more than one verification period provided a deduction plan has been submitted to and 
approved by Verra.   
Projects must describe the applicable calculations as a project description deviation in the first 
monitoring report submitted after transitioning to VM0048. The validation/verification body must 
assess the calculations and ensure that a deduction plan, where relevant, has been approved by 
Verra. 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
The same procedure for project emissions must be followed ex ante and ex post. For parameters 
monitored after project initiation, guidance is given in the parameter tables of the relevant 
modules for ex ante calculations. 
Methods for estimating net carbon stock changes and GHG emissions in the project scenario are 
provided in the relevant activity modules (e.g., AUDef). 
8.3 
Leakage 
Emissions from different leakage sources must be estimated unless deemed de minimis: 
1) Activity-shifting leakage; 
2) Market-effect leakage; and 
3) Emissions from leakage prevention activities.  
The relevant activity modules specify the leakage sources that must be estimated. The 
significance of leakage and carbon pools must be determined using Appendix 1 of this 
methodology.  
The relevant activity modules (e.g., AUDef) provide methods for estimating net carbon stock 
changes and GHG emissions due to activity-shifting leakage. 
Leakage due to market effects must be considered using LK-ME. Market effects must be 
considered where the project leads to decreased timber, fuelwood or charcoal production. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
13 
Where leakage prevention activities result in significant increases in emissions from carbon stock 
changes, biomass burning and/or increased fertilizer usage,3 any increase in GHG emissions 
associated with these activities must be accounted for following the relevant activity modules 
(e.g., AUDef), unless deemed de minimis. 
Leakage prevention activities may lead to an increase in the combustion of fossil fuels. However, 
any increase in emissions because of the increased combustion of fossil fuels is considered de 
minimis and does not need to be quantified or reported. 
Where leakage prevention leads to a significant increase in fertilizer use, module E-NA must be 
used. 
Leakage prevention must not include the flooding of agricultural lands (e.g., for new rice paddies) 
nor the creation of livestock feedlots or manure lagoons. Leakage prevention must not include 
the drainage of peatland. 
The list of leakage sources with appropriate justification must be presented in the project 
description. 
8.4 
Net GHG Emission Reductions 
The project proponent must present conservative ex ante estimations of the project activity's 
total net GHG emissions reductions. 
Refer to the relevant accounting modules and the parameter tables within these modules for 
instructions on ex ante estimations of specific parameters. 
The potential number of Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) for the monitoring period t is estimated as 
follows: 
끫뢒끫뢒끫뢒끫룂= 끫뢒끫뢒끫뢒끫롨끫롨끫롨끫롨끫롨+ 끫뢒끫뢒끫뢒끫롨끫롨끫롨끫롨끫롨+ 끫뢒끫뢒끫뢒끫롨끫롨끫롨끫롨끫롨 
(1) 
Where: 
VCUt 
= Number of potential Verified Carbon Units at year t = t2 − t1 (VCU) 
VCUAUDef 
= Number of potential Verified Carbon Units from unplanned deforestation at year 
t = t2 − t1 (VCU) 
VCUAPDef 
= Number of potential Verified Carbon Units from planned deforestation at year 
t = t2 − t1 (VCU) 
 
3  Potentially as part of tree planting, aquacultural intensification, agricultural intensification, fertilization, fodder 
production, other measures to enhance cropland and/or grazing land areas, leakage management zones or a 
combination of these 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
14 
VCUAUDeg 
= Number of potential Verified Carbon Units from unplanned forest degradation at 
year t = t2 − t1 (VCU)