4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to Avoiding Unplanned Deforestation project activities and is 
applicable globally under the following conditions: 
1) Baseline activities include planned or unplanned logging for timber, fuel-wood 
collection, charcoal production, agriculture or grazing activities as long as the category 
is Avoiding Unplanned Deforestation according to the most recent VCS Standard. 
2) Project activities include one or a combination of the eligible categories defined in the 
description of the methodology scope (Table 1 and Appendix 1).  
3) The project area includes one or a combination of forest types, such as, but not limited 
to, old-growth forest, degraded forest, secondary forests, planted forests or agro-
forestry systems meeting the definition of “forest.” 
4) At the project start, the project area includes only land qualifying as “forest” for a 
minimum of 10 years prior to the project start date. 
5) The project area may include forested wetlands (such as bottomland forests, floodplain 
forests, mangrove forests) where they do not grow on peat (as defined in Section 0).  
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
6) The project area includes forested wetlands growing on peat (e.g., peat swamp forests). 
5 PROJECT BOUNDARY (STEP 1) 
The purpose of this step is to define the spatial and temporal boundaries, carbon pools and 
sources of greenhouse gas (other than carbon stock changes) in the project. 
5.1 
Spatial Boundaries 
Define the boundaries of the following spatial features: reference region, project area, leakage 
belt, leakage management zones and forest. The reference region is the largest unit of land. 
The project area, leakage belt and leakage management zones are subsets of the reference 
region. The criteria used to define their boundaries must be described and justified in the PD. 
The project proponent must provide digital (vector-based) files of these features in a format 
specified by the most recent version of the VCS Standard. 
5.1.1 Reference Region 
The boundary of the reference region is the spatial delimitation of the analytic domain from 
which information about rates, agents, drivers and patterns of land use and land cover change 
(LU/LC change) will be obtained, projected into the future, and monitored. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
13 
The reference region should contain strata with agents, drivers and patterns of deforestation 
that in the 10-year period prior to the start date of the proposed AUD project activity are similar 
to those expected to exist within the project area. A geographic area is relevant for determining 
the baseline scenario of the project area where it represents a credible proxy for future 
deforestation patterns in the project area. 
The boundary of the reference region must be defined as follows: 
1) The reference region must be a single contiguous area that encompasses the project area 
and the leakage belt. 
2) The reference region must be larger than the project area. For projects equal to or larger 
than 100 000 ha, the reference region must be five to seven times larger than the project 
area. For projects smaller than 100 000 ha, the reference region must be 20-40 times the 
size of the project area.7  
3) The boundaries of the reference region must be unbiased and coincide with a combination 
of natural and administrative boundaries so that land use and land cover related policies 
are consistent across the reference area. Forests located in the same geography should 
not be arbitrarily excluded. High deforestation areas should not be arbitrarily included in 
the reference region. The rationale behind the reference region delineation must be 
described in the PD. 
4) Where a project area includes an entire forest island, the reference region must include 
other islands or forested landscapes with similar conditions.  
5) Where the current situation within the project area is expected to change (e.g., because of 
population growth, infrastructure development or any other plausible reason), the 
reference region must be divided into strata, each representing proxies for the chrono-
sequence of current and future conditions within the project area. The boundary of such 
strata may be static (fixed during a baseline validity period) or dynamic8 (changing every 
year), depending on the modeling approaches used. 
Once the boundary of the reference region is delineated, the project must demonstrate, using 
verifiable data, that the conditions determining the likelihood of deforestation within the project 
area are similar, or expected to become similar, to those found in the reference region.  
The project area must be 100 percent forested at the project start date. A 5-km buffer (leakage 
belt) surrounding the project area should be delineated to allow demonstration of similarity 
between the reference region and non-forested areas adjacent to the project area. Alternatively, 
the area may be delineated using mobility analysis. Where mobility analysis has been used to 
 
7  Following Brown et al. (2007) 
8 With shifting boundaries, according to modeled changes at the level of driver variables such as population, 
infrastructure and others to be determined by the project proponent. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
14 
delineate the leakage belt, the same analysis should be used to demonstrate the likelihood of 
deforestation within the project area. 
Similarity of deforestation risk in the reference region and project area must be demonstrated 
using three criteria: the agents and drivers of deforestation, landscape configuration and 
ecological conditions and socio-economic and cultural conditions: 
1) The main agents and all drivers of deforestation expected to cause deforestation within 
the project area in the absence of the proposed AUD project activity must exist or have 
existed elsewhere in the reference region. The following requirements must be met: 
a) Deforestation agent groups (as identified in Section 6.2.1) expected to encroach 
into the project area exist or have existed and caused deforestation elsewhere in 
the reference region during the historical reference period. 
b) Settlement density (settlements/km2) and road density (m/km2) in the reference 
region at the start of the historical reference period is the same, less than or 
does not exceed by more than 20 percent the settlement density surrounding the 
project area, at the project start date. Where new or improved infrastructure (e.g., 
roads, railroads, bridges, hydroelectric reservoirs) is expected to be developed 
near or inside the project area,9 the reference region includes a stratum where 
such infrastructure was built in the past and where the impact on forest cover 
was similar to that expected from new or improved infrastructure in the project 
area. Where the project area is adjacent to navigable rivers, their density (m/km2) 
in the reference region is the same, less than or does not exceed by more than 
20 percent the navigable river density in and surrounding the project area. 
c) Any spatial deforestation driver considered relevant according to Section 6.2.2 
(e.g., resettlement programs, mining and oil concessions) exists or has existed 
elsewhere in the reference region. The historical impact of such drivers is similar 
to that expected in the project area. 
Agents and drivers that are present in the reference region, but unlikely to be present in 
the project area must be identified, and the area affected by them removed from the 
reference region. For example, since planned deforestation in the baseline case is 
excluded from the project area, designated and planned deforestation must also be 
excluded from the reference region. 
2) The following landscape configuration and ecological conditions must be satisfied: 
a) At least 90 percent of the project area has forest classes or vegetation types that 
exist in at least 90 percent of the rest of the reference region. 
 
9 Areas of planned deforestation in the baseline case must be excluded from the project area. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
15 
b) At least 90 percent of the project area is within the elevation range of at least 90 
percent of the rest of the reference region. 
c) The average slope of at least 90 percent of the project area is within ±10 percent 
of the average slope of at least 90 percent of the rest of the reference region. 
d) The average annual rainfall in at least 90 percent of the project area is within 
±10 percent of the average annual rainfall of at least 90 percent of the rest of 
the reference region. 
e) At least 90 percent of the project area has soil types that exist in at least 90 
percent of the reference region.  
3) The following socio-economic and cultural conditions must be met: 
a) The legal status of the land (e.g., private, forest concession, conservation 
concession) prevalent in the reference region is demonstrated to be similar to 
that expected to be prevalent in the project area under the baseline case. Where 
the legal status of the project area is a unique case, demonstrate that legal 
status is not biasing the baseline of the project area (e.g., by demonstrating that 
access to the land by deforestation agents is similar to other areas with a 
different legal status). 
b) The land-tenure system prevalent in the project area in the baseline case is 
prevalent in the reference region.  
c) Current and projected classes of land use in the project area are found elsewhere 
in the reference region. 
d) The project area is governed by the same policies, legislation and regulations that 
apply in the reference region. 
e) The proportion of urbanized and agriculture-based population within the 
reference region is within 10 percent of the proportion in the areas surrounding 
the project area.  
Any differences in land tenure or legal status systems between the project area and 
reference region must not affect the drivers of deforestation and degradation or the 
operation of the agents of deforestation and degradation. 
At baseline reassessment, the project must demonstrate that the reference region remains a 
credible proxy of deforestation patterns in the project area during the new baseline validity 
period. The same conditions as above must be met. Any changes to the reference region that 
lead to less conservative baseline GHG emissions should be justified by the revised analysis of 
agents and drivers and demonstrated using verifiable evidence.    
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
16 
5.1.2 Project Area 
The project area is the area(s) of land under control of the project proponent and where the 
project activities will be carried out. The project area must be exclusively forest land at the 
project start date. 
Any area affected or expected to be affected by planned deforestation under the baseline 
scenario must be excluded from the project area. Planned deforestation may only be included 
in the project area where it is a project activity and accounted for in the project GHG emissions. 
The project area must include areas projected to be deforested in the baseline case and may 
include some other areas that are not threatened according to the first baseline assessment 
(see Figure 1). Such areas will not generate VCUs, but they may be included where the project 
proponent considers that future baseline reassessments are likely to indicate future 
deforestation threats that it is not possible to demonstrate at the time of validation. 
Where less than 80 percent of the total proposed area of the project is under the project 
proponent’s control at validation, new discrete units of land may be integrated into an existing 
project area where included in the monitoring report at the time of the first verification. Refer to 
the most recent version of the VCS Standard for the full rules and requirements regarding 
control over the entire project area at validation. 
The boundary of the project area must be unambiguously defined as follows: 
1) Name (or names, as appropriate) of the project area; 
2) Physical boundary of each discrete area of land included in the project area in a file 
format specified by the VCS Standard; 
3) Description of current land tenure and ownership, including any legal arrangement 
related to land ownership and the AUD project activity; and 
4) List of the project participants and brief description of their roles in the proposed AUD 
project activity. 
5.1.3 Leakage Belt 
Leakage is subject to MRV-A in an area called the “leakage belt” in this methodology. 
The leakage belt is the land area(s) surrounding or adjacent to the project area where baseline 
activities may be displaced due to the project activities implemented in the project area.  
Two methods may be used to delineate the leakage belt: opportunity cost analysis (Option I) or 
mobility analysis (Option II). 
The leakage belt boundary must be reassessed at the end of each baseline validity period, as 
opportunity costs and mobility parameters are likely to change over time. It must also be 
reassessed when a VCS AFOLU project is registered that is located in the project’s leakage belt 
area as specified in Section 5.1.3.3. Changes in the leakage belt boundary must be reported 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
17 
and verified as a PD deviation. Any time the leakage belt boundary is reassessed, the baseline 
emissions must be recalculated to reflect the change. 
Where opportunity costs or mobility parameters are projected for each future year, the 
boundary of the leakage belt that is adopted for the whole duration of the baseline validity 
period must be that projected for the last year of the baseline validity period. 
5.1.3.1 Option I:  Opportunity Cost Analysis 
This option is applicable where economic profit is an important driver of deforestation. To 
demonstrate that Option I is applicable, use historical records to show that at least 80 percent 
of the area deforested in the reference region (or some of its strata) during the historical 
reference period has occurred at locations where deforestation was profitable (i.e., for at least 
one product, PPxl ≥ 1). Alternatively, use published studies, surveys and other credible and 
verifiable sources of information. If Option I is not applicable, use Option II. 
Where the main motivation is economic profit, agents not allowed to deforest within the project 
area will shift deforestation outside the project area only if doing so brings economic benefits 
to them. Based on this rationale, leakage may only occur on land outside the project area 
where the total cost of establishing and growing crops or cattle and transporting the products to 
the market is lower than the price of the products (i.e., opportunity costs are > 0). To identify 
this land area, do the following: 
1) List the main land uses, such as cattle ranching and/or crops, that deforestation 
agents are likely to implement within the project area in the baseline case. 
2) Find credible and verifiable sources of information on the following variables: 
a) S$x = Average selling price per tonne of main product Px (or product mixture in 
case of agro-forestry or mixed production systems) that would be established in 
the project area in the baseline case (e.g., meat, crop type A, crop type B) 
b) SPxl = Most important selling points (spatial locations) for each main product Px 
in the reference region 
c) PCxi = Average in situ production costs per tonne of product. Stratify the 
reference region as necessary in i strata, as production costs may vary 
depending on local conditions (e.g., soil, technology available to the producer) 
d) TCv = Average transport cost per kilometer for one tonne of product Px 
transported on different types of land uses (e.g., pasture, cropland, forest), 
roads, railroads and navigable rivers using the most typical transport 
technology available to the producer 
Note – for simplicity, current prices and costs may be used to project opportunity costs. Price 
and cost projections must only be used only where reliable and verifiable sources of 
information are available. 
3) Using a geographic information system (GIS), generate for each main product a surface 
representing the minimum transport cost of one tonne of product to the most important 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
18 
selling points within the reference region. Do this by considering the most common 
transport technology available to deforestation agents. 
4) For each main product, add to the surface created in (3) above the average in situ cost 
for producing one tonne of product. The result is a surface representing the total cost 
of producing and bringing to the market one tonne of product.  
5) For each main product, subtract from the average price of one ton of product the total 
cost surface created in (4) above. The result is a surface representing potential 
profitability of each product.  
Note – where several products may be produced at the same site, the maximum value of all 
potential profitability surfaces will represent the opportunity cost of conserving the forest. 
6) The leakage belt is the area where the potential profitability surface created in (5) has 
a positive value at the last year of the baseline validity period. 
The above procedure may be summarized as follows: 
A land unit (pixel or polygon l) is inside the leakage belt where the potential profitability (PPxl) of 
at least one product is positive, where PPxl is calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝑃𝑥𝑙= 𝑆$𝑥−𝑃𝐶𝑥𝑖−∑
(𝑇𝐷𝑣∗𝑇𝐶𝑣)
𝑉
𝑣=1
                                                                                       
(1) 
Where: 
PPxl 
= 
Potential profitability of product Px at location l (pixel or polygon) ($/t) 
S$x 
= 
Selling price of product Px ($/t) 
PCxi 
= 
Average in situ production costs for one tonne of product Px in stratum i ($/t) 
TCv 
= 
Average transport cost per kilometer for one tonne of product Px on land, river  
or road of type v ($/t/km) 
TDv 
= 
Transport distance on land, river or road of type v (km) 
v 
= 
1, 2, 3 …, V type of surface on which transport occurs (dimensionless) 
Note – Option I assumes deforestation agents in the project area will not displace their 
activities beyond the reference region, where other forested areas with potentially positive 
opportunity costs may exist. Demonstrate that this assumption is credible using expert opinion, 
participatory rural appraisal, literature, and/or other verifiable sources of information. Where 
the evidence collected is not convincing, use Option II (mobility analysis).  
5.1.3.2 Option II: Mobility Analysis 
Mobility analysis may always be used but must be used where Option I is not applicable (i.e., 
where less than 80 percent of the area deforested in the reference region (or some of its 
strata) during the historical reference period has occurred at locations where deforesting was 
profitable). In Option II, the potential mobility of deforestation agents is assessed using multi-
criteria analysis. The following steps must be applied: 
1) Using historical data, expert opinion, participatory rural appraisal, literature and/or 
other verifiable sources of information, list all relevant criteria that facilitate (at least 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
19 
one criterion) and constrain (at least one criterion) the mobility of the main 
deforestation agents identified in Section 6.2.1. The overall suitability of the land for 
the deforestation agents’ activities must be considered.  
2) For each criterion, generate a map using GIS. 
3) Using multi-criteria analysis, determine the boundary of the leakage belt. Justify any 
assumption and weight assigned to the individual criteria. 
4) Methods used to perform the analysis must be transparently documented and 
presented to the validation/verification body (VVB) at validation. 
5) The assumptions made for the analysis must be supported by historical data. 
5.1.3.3 Consideration of Other VCS AFOLU Projects 
Where the leakage belt area of the proposed AUD project includes the area or part of the areas 
of other VCS AFOLU projects, do the following to avoid double counting of emissions: 
1) Exclude the project area of the other VCS AFOLU project(s) from the leakage belt area 
of the proposed AUD project.  
a) The exclusion must enter into force at the registration date of the other project 
b) Carbon accounting must consider the exclusion of the project area of the other 
project beginning with the start date of the other projects  
c) An excluded area must again be included in the leakage belt area of the 
proposed AUD project at the time the other project has not verified its emission 
reductions for more than five consecutive years, or when it ends its project 
crediting period under the VCS. 
2) Where the leakage belt overlaps with the leakage belt of other VCS AFOLU projects, do 
the following: 
a) Identify the carbon pools and sources of GHG emissions that are monitored by 
the other projects. For common carbon pools and sources of GHG emissions 
only, the boundary of the leakage belt may be modified as further explained 
below. 
b) Analyze the overlapping area(s) with the proponents of each of the other VCS 
AFOLU projects and come to an agreement with them on the location of the 
boundaries of the different leakage belts, so that there are no overlaps or gaps 
between the different leakage belt areas as well as carbon pools and GHG 
sources. 
c) As an indicative rule, the percentage of forest land area within the leakage belt 
of a project relative to the total forest area of all leakage belts must be similar 
to the percentage of baseline deforestation of the project relative to the total 
baseline deforestation of all projects:  
%𝐿𝐾𝐵𝐴 =  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐴 / (𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐴 +  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐵 + … +  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝑁) 
 
 
(2a) 
%𝐿𝐾𝐵𝐵 =  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐵 / (𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐴 +  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐵 + … +  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝑁) 
 
 
(2b) 
… 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
20 
%𝐿𝐾𝐵𝑁 =  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝑁 / (𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐴 +  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝐵 + … +  𝐵𝐿𝐷𝑁) 
 
 
(2n) 
Where: 
%LKBA 
= 
Percentage of overlapping leakage belts area assigned to  
Project A (%) 
%LKBB 
= 
Percentage of overlapping leakage belts area assigned to 
Project B (%) 
%LKBN 
= 
Percentage of overlapping leakage belts area assigned to  
Project N (%) 
BLDA 
= 
Total area of projected baseline deforestation during the  
baseline validity period of Project A (see PD of project A) (ha) 
BLDB 
= 
Total area of projected baseline deforestation during the  
baseline validity period of Project B (see PD of project B) (ha) 
BLDN 
= 
Total area of projected baseline deforestation during the  
baseline validity period of Project N (see PD of Project N) (ha) 
Note – the proponents of the different projects must agree on the criteria used to define 
the boundaries of their leakage belts in the overlapping areas and are not required to use 
the above rule. However, where they decide to use this rule, the area of the overlapping 
leakage belts assigned to Project A must be the closest to the boundary of Project A; that 
assigned to Project B must be the closest to the boundary of Project B and so on (the area 
of the overlapping leakage belts assigned to Project N must be the closest to the boundary 
of Project N). 
d) The final boundary of the leakage belt of each project is subject to validation 
and periodic verification. A project may report a smaller leakage belt only where 
the part that is excluded is included in another VCS-registered project’s leakage 
belt. 
e) Where the proponents of the different projects disagree on splitting the 
overlapping leakage belt area, each project must include the overlapping areas 
in its leakage belt. 
f) 
A “leakage belt agreement” between the proponents of the different projects 
must be signed and presented to the VVB at validation/verification. The 
agreement must include maps of the agreed leakage belts, and each project 
must have a digital copy of these maps in the projection and GIS software 
formats used in each project. 
g) Where a project ends or has not completed a verification for more than five 
consecutive years, the other projects participating in the “leakage belt 
agreement” must amend the agreement to ensure that the whole area of the 
originally overlapping leakage belts is always subject to MRV-A. The 
amendment is subject to VVB verification. If no amendment is made, the 
proposed project must include in its leakage belt the land area that is no longer 
subject to MRV-A by any another VCS project. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
21 
5.1.4 Leakage Management Zones 
These are non-forest areas located outside the project boundary in which the project proponent 
intends to implement activities (such as afforestation, reforestation or enhanced crop and 
grazing land management) that will reduce the risk of activity displacement leakage. Such 
areas must be delineated according to existing management plans or other plans related to the 
proposed AUD project activity that must be made available to the VVB at validation. The 
boundary of leakage management zones must be clearly defined and digital (vector-based) files 
in any format specified by the VCS Standard must be provided. A clear description must 
accompany the file, and the metadata must contain all necessary projection reference data. 
The boundary of the leakage management zone must be reassessed and validated at each 
baseline validity period.  
5.1.5 Forest 
The boundary of the forest is dynamic and will change over time. It must be defined using an 
explicit and consistent forest definition over different time periods. 
In the baseline case, changes in the boundary of forest land are projected. The ex post 
boundary of forest land in the project area and leakage belt will be subject to periodic MRV. 
To define the forest boundary, specify: 
1) The definition of forest that used for measuring deforestation during the project 
crediting period 
2) The minimum mapping unit (MMU). The MMU of LULC maps created using remote 
sensing imagery must not be larger than one hectare irrespective of forest definition. 
An initial forest cover map is required to report only gross deforestation going forward. It should 
depict the locations where forest land exists at the project start date. The baseline projections 
in Section 8.1.3 will generate one such map for each future year of the baseline validity period 
and, optionally, the project crediting period. 
Areas covered by clouds or shadows must be analyzed by complementing the analysis of optical 
sensor data with non-optical sensor data. However, where some obscured areas remain for 
which no spatially explicit and verifiable information on forest cover is available nor for which it 
is possible to collect data (using ground-based or other methods), such areas must be excluded 
(masked out). This exclusion is either: 
a) Permanent, unless it may be reasonably assumed that these areas are covered by 
forests (e.g., due to their location); or 
b) Temporary, where information is available for the historical reference period but not for 
a specific monitoring period. In this case, the area with no information must be 
excluded from the calculation of net GHG emission reductions for the current 
monitoring period, but not for subsequent periods when information may become 
available again. When information becomes available again, and the land appears with 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
22 
vegetation parameters below the thresholds for defining “forest,” the land should be 
considered as “deforested.” 
5.2 
Temporal Boundaries 
Define the temporal boundaries listed below.  
5.2.1 Start and End Dates of the Historical Reference Period 
The historical reference period start date should not be more than 10 years before the project 
start date. The end should be as close as possible to the project start date.  
5.2.2 Start Date of the AUD Project Activity Crediting Period 
The length of the project crediting period is set out in the most recent version of the VCS 
Program Definitions.   
5.2.3 Start and End Dates of the First Baseline Validity Period 
The baseline validity period is set out in the most recent VCS Standard. The start and end dates 
must be defined.  
5.2.4 Monitoring Period 
The minimum duration of a monitoring period is one year, and the maximum duration is one 
baseline validity period. 
5.3 
Carbon Pools 
The greenhouse gases included in or excluded from the project boundary are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2: Carbon Pools Included in or Excluded from the Boundary of the Proposed AUD 
Project Activity 
Carbon pools  
Included/TBD/ 
Excluded 
Justification/Explanation of choice  
Above-ground 
biomass 
Tree: Included 
Carbon stock change in this pool is always significant. 
Non-tree: TBD 
Must be included in categories where the baseline final 
land cover is perennial crop 
Below-ground 
biomass+ 
TBD 
Optional  
Dead wood+ 
TBD 
Mandatory if this carbon pool is greater in the baseline 
final land cover (post-deforestation) than project scenario, 
and unless demonstrated insignificant. Otherwise, can be 
conservatively omitted 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
23 
Carbon pools  
Included/TBD/ 
Excluded 
Justification/Explanation of choice  
Harvested wood 
products+ 
Included 
To be included where significant  
Litter 
TBD 
Optional –conservative to exclude  
Soil organic 
carbon+ 
TBD 
Recommended where forests are converted to cropland. 
Not to be measured in conversions to pastures or 
perennial crop according to the latest version of the VCS 
Methodology Requirements 
 
TABLE NOTES 
TBD 
To be decided by the project proponent; may be excluded only where exclusion does not lead 
to a significant overestimation of the net GHG emission reductions of the AUD project activity. 
+ 
The VCS Methodology Requirements require methodologies to consider the decay of carbon 
in soil carbon, belowground biomass, dead wood and harvested wood products. The 
immediate release of carbon from these pools in the baseline case must not be assumed. 
 
The significance of pools must be determined as per the latest VCS Methodology 
Requirements. It must be assessed ex ante or at baseline reassessment for a specific baseline 
validity period, as well as at verification for a specific monitoring period. Appendix 2 should be 
used to test significance of pools. 
Carbon pools that are expected to decrease their stocks in the project scenario compared to 
the baseline must be included where their exclusion leads to a significant overestimation of the 
net GHG emission reductions generated during the baseline validity period. 
Where a carbon pool is included in the baseline accounting, it must also be included in project 
scenario and leakage accounting. 
Carbon pools considered insignificant according to the latest VCS Methodology Requirements 
may always be neglected. 
Above-ground tree biomass must always be included because it is in this pool that the greatest 
carbon stock change will occur. 
Non-tree biomass must be included where the carbon stock in this pool is likely to be relatively 
large in the baseline compared to the project scenario, such as when short-rotation woody 
corps are commonly planted in the region where the project area is located. The significance 
criterion must apply. 
Below-ground tree biomass is recommended for inclusion, as it usually represents between 15 
and 30 percent of above-ground biomass. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
24 
Harvested wood products must be included where removal of timber is associated with 
significantly more carbon stored in long-term wood products in the baseline than the project 
scenario, and where the pool is included in the project scenario. The significance criterion must 
apply. When included, the short-lived fraction (decaying in less than 3 years) is assumed to 
decay immediately at the year of deforestation (t = t*); the medium-lived fraction (decaying in 
3–100 years) is assumed to decay over a 20-year period; and the long-lived fraction is assumed 
to never decay (i.e., it does not result in emissions).     
The exclusion of a carbon pool is conservative in most cases except where the carbon stock in 
the pool is higher in the baseline than in the project scenario. 
The inclusion of a carbon pool is recommended (but not mandatory) where the pool is likely to 
represent an important proportion (more than 10 percent) of the total carbon stock change 
attributable to the project activity (“expected magnitude of change”). 
For excluded pools, briefly explain why the exclusion is conservative. 
Where the exclusion of a carbon pool is not conservative, demonstrate that the exclusion will 
not lead to a significant overestimation of the net GHG emission reductions. Where the 
exclusion is significant, the pool must be included. 
In most cases the same carbon pools must be considered for all categories of LU/LC change. 
However, different carbon pools may be included for different categories of LU/LC change 
depending on “significance,” “conservativeness” and “expected magnitude of change.” For 
instance, harvested wood products may only be considered in the categories where this pool 
exists. 
Within a LU/LC-change category, the same carbon pools must be selected for the two classes 
involved. Table 68 in Appendix 4: Methods to Estimate Emissions from Enteric Fermentation 
and Manure Management0 provides an indication of the level of priority for including different 
carbon pools depending on the LU/LC change category. 
There is further guidance on the selection of carbon pools in the most recent version of the 
GOFC-GOLD REDD sourcebook; details are given in Appendix 3. 
5.4 
Sources of GHG Emissions 
The two sources of GHG emissions listed in Table 3 are considered in this methodology. 
 
 
 
 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
25 
Table 3: Sources and GHG to be Included in or Excluded from the Boundary of the 
Proposed AUD Project Activity 
Sources 
Gas 
Included/TBD/ 
Excluded 
Justification/Explanation of choice 
Biomass burning 
CO2 
Excluded 
Counted as carbon stock change 
CH4 
TBD 
See guidance below 
N2O 
Excluded 
Considered insignificant* according to the 
VCS Methodology Requirements 
Livestock emissions 
CO2 
Excluded 
Not a significant* source 
CH4 
TBD 
See guidance below 
N2O 
TBD 
See guidance below 
 
TABLE NOTES 
TBD 
To be decided by the project proponent; may be excluded only where exclusion does not lead 
to a significant overestimation of the net GHG emission reductions of the AUD project activity. 
* 
Carbon pools and sources that account for more than 5 percent of the total GHG benefits 
generated must be considered “significant.” To determine significance, Appendix 2 must be 
used. 
Emissions sources that are expected to increase in the project scenario compared to the 
baseline must be included where their exclusion leads to a significant overestimation of the 
total net GHG emission reductions generated during the baseline validity period. 
Sources considered insignificant according to the latest VCS Methodology Requirements may 
always be neglected. 
The inclusion of a source is recommended (but not mandatory) where the source is likely to 
represent an important proportion (more than 10 percent) of the total emissions reductions 
attributable to the project activity (“expected magnitude of change”). 
A source may only be excluded where the omission is conservative or the source is insignificant. 
Sources of GHG emissions that are not significant according to the ex ante assessment do not 
need to be monitored ex post. 
For excluded sources, briefly explain why the exclusion is conservative. 
In the baseline scenario, non-CO2 emissions from fires used to clear forests may be counted 
where sufficient data are available for estimation. However, accounting for these emissions 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
26 
may be conservatively omitted. GHG emissions from land uses implemented on deforested 
lands (including from biomass burning) are conservatively omitted in this methodology. 
In the project scenario, it is reasonable to assume that the project activity, including when 
harvest activities are planned (such as logging for timber, fuel-wood collection and charcoal 
production), produces less GHG emissions than the baseline activities implemented prior to 
and after deforestation on the deforested lands. Therefore, excluding certain sources of GHG 
emissions, such as fossil fuel consumption, will not cause an overestimation of net GHG 
emission reductions. However, non-CO2 emissions from forest fires must be counted in the 
project scenario where they are significant. 
In leakage estimation, GHG emissions of sources attributable to leakage prevention measures 
(e.g., those implemented in leakage management zones) and that increase compared to pre-
existing GHG emissions count as leakage and should be estimated and counted where they are 
significant. Non-CO2 emissions from displaced baseline activities, which are conservatively 
omitted in the baseline, may be ignored, as they would be similar to baseline emissions in the 
worst-case scenario. However, where non-CO2 emissions from forest fires used to clear forests 
are counted in the baseline, they must also be counted in the estimation of activity 
displacement leakage.