3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in VCS document Program Definitions, the following 
definitions apply to this methodology: 
Allochthonous Soil Organic Carbon 
Soil organic carbon originating outside the project area and being deposited in the project area 
 
Autochthonous Soil Organic Carbon 
Soil organic carbon originating or forming in the project area (e.g., from vegetation) 
 
Carbon Preservation Depositional Environment (CPDE) 
Type of sub-aquatic sediment deposition environment that impacts the amount of deposited 
organic carbon that is preserved. Carbon preservation is affected by mineral grain size, 
sediment accumulation and burial rates, O2 availability in the overlying water column and 
sediment hydraulic conductivity. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
8 
 
Degraded wetland 
A wetland which has been altered by human or natural impact through the impairment of 
physical, chemical and/or biological properties, and in which the alteration has resulted in a 
reduction of the diversity of wetland-associated species, soil carbon or the complexity of other 
ecosystem functions which previously existed in the wetland  
 
Deltaic Fluidized Mud 
A Carbon Preservation Depositional Environment (CPDE) type. This subaquatic depositional 
environment is characterized by sediment accumulation rates generally greater than 0.4 g 
sediment per cm2 per year in deltaic settings, consisting primarily of fluidized (unconsolidated) 
fine-grain materials. Surface sediments may be re-suspended by waves and tides, but 
deposited organic matter will be buried. Examples of these can be found in the Amazon and 
Mississippi deltas. 
 
Extreme Accumulation Rate 
A Carbon Preservation Depositional Environment (CPDE) type. This subaquatic depositional 
environment is characterized by accumulation rates generally greater than 1 g sediment per 
cm2 per year resulting in rapid and long-term burial of deposited sediments. Examples of these 
systems can be found in the Ganges-Brahmaputra and Rhone River deltas. 
 
Impounded Water  
A pool of water formed by a dam or pit 
 
Marsh 
A subset of wetlands characterized by emergent soft-stemmed vegetation adapted to saturated 
soil conditions1  
 
Mineral Soil 
Soil that is not organic 
 
Mudflat 
A subset of tidal wetlands consisting of soft substrate not supporting emergent vegetation  
 
Normal marine 
A Carbon Preservation Depositional Environment (CPDE) type. This is a depositional 
environment that does not meet the definition of the other four defined conditions (i.e., deltaic 
fluidized mud, extreme accumulation rate, oxygen depletion zone, or small mountainous river). 
 
1 There are many different kinds of marshes, ranging from the prairie potholes to the Everglades, coastal to inland, freshwater 
to saltwater, but the scope of this methodology is limited to tidal marshes. Salt marshes consist of salt-tolerant and dwarf 
brushwood vegetation overlying mineral or organic soils.  
 
VM0033, v2.1 
9 
Normal marine environments typically have low sedimentation rates and high O2 availability in 
overlying sediments. 
 
Open Water 
An area in which water levels do not fall to an elevation that exposes the underlying substrate 
 
Organic Soil 
Soil with a surface layer of material that has a sufficient depth and percentage of organic carbon 
to meet thresholds set by the IPCC (Wetlands supplement) for organic soil. Where used in this 
methodology, the term peat is used to refer to organic soil. 
 
Oxygen (O2) Depletion Zone 
A Carbon Preservation Depositional Environment (CPDE) type. This is a depositional 
environment with low O2 levels in water overlying sediments due to restricted hydrologic 
circulation or impaired water quality that leads to hypoxic or anaerobic conditions (including 
euxinic and semi-euxinic). 
 
Salinity Average 
The average water salinity value of a wetland ecosystem used to represent variation in salinity 
during periods of peak CH4 emissions (e.g., during the growing season in temperate ecosystems) 
 
Salinity Low Point 
The minimum water salinity value of a wetland ecosystem used to represent variation in salinity 
during periods of peak CH4 emissions (e.g., during the growing season in temperate ecosystems) 
 
Seagrass Meadow 
An accumulation of seagrass plants over a mappable area2 
 
Small Mountainous River 
A Carbon Preservation Depositional Environment (CPDE) type. This is a depositional 
environment from which the sediment is supplied from small mountainous rivers, most 
commonly found in tectonically active margins and small steep gradients. Sediment 
accumulation rates are generally greater than 0.27 g sediment per cm2 per year. Examples of 
these systems can be found in the rivers flowing from the island of Taiwan and the Eel River of 
California. 
 
Tidal Wetland 
A subset of wetlands under the influence of the wetting and drying cycles of the tides (e.g., 
marshes, seagrass meadows, tidal forested wetlands, and mangroves). Sub-tidal seagrass 
 
2 This definition includes both the biotic community and the geographic area where the biotic community occurs. Note that 
the vast majority of seagrass meadows are sub-tidal, but a percentage are intertidal.  
 
VM0033, v2.1 
10 
meadows are not subject to drying cycles but are still included in this definition. 
 
Tidal Wetland Restoration 
Re-establishing or improving the hydrology, salinity, water quality, sediment supply and/or 
vegetation in degraded or converted tidal wetlands. For the purpose of this methodology, this 
definition also includes activities that create wetland ecological conditions on uplands under the 
influence of sea level rise or activities that convert one wetland type to another or activities that 
convert open water to wetland. 
 
Water Table Depth 
Depth of sub-soil or above-soil surface of water, relative to the soil surface