1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION 
Additionality, Crediting Method, and Mitigation Outcome 
 
Additionality 
Performance Method  
Crediting Baseline 
Performance Method  
Mitigation Outcome 
Reductions and Removals 
  
This methodology is applicable to a wide range of improved forest management (IFM) practices 
and employs standardized approaches for demonstration of additionality and derivation of 
project baselines to simplify application of the methodology. 
The focus of accounting is on estimation of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and/or carbon 
stock change in permanent plots, not on estimation of stocks per se, therefore improving the 
precision of reported GHG emission reductions and/or carbon dioxide removals. 
The methodology employs a broad monitoring and accounting framework that captures the 
GHG impacts of IFM practices aimed at avoiding emissions (from harvest or natural 
disturbance) or enhancing sequestration. Projects may apply a combination of practices 
implemented together in the same area. 
Examples of potential activities include enrichment planting, release of natural regeneration via 
management of competing vegetation, stand irrigation and/or fertilization, reducing timber 
harvest levels, deferring harvest/extending rotations or cutting cycles, designating reserves, 
and altering fire severity via fuel load treatments.  
For all activities, the methodology uses a matching approach to construct a quasi-experimental 
design with matched pairs of treatments (project) and controls (baseline), with baseline plots 
sourced from existing continuously measured national or sub-national forest inventory data. 
Carbon stock change is directly monitored in permanent sample units representing the project 
and baseline scenarios. The baseline is represented by a collection of sample plots outside of 
the project area that match the initial conditions of each paired project plot. Ex-post monitoring 
of the baseline in this way provides a more robust estimate of impacts compared to model- or 
default-driven approaches, which reflect the effects of exogenous factors like climate and 
timber markets on achieved GHG emission reductions. 
Most IFM methodologies are dependent on long-term projections using forest growth and yield 
models. An important distinguishing feature of this methodology is that no forest growth and 
yield modeling is required to quantify GHG emission reductions and/or carbon dioxide 
removals. This methodology uses a dynamic performance benchmark approach, where the 
 
 
 
 
VM0045, v1.2 
6 
baseline scenario is represented by constituent baseline plots that are continuously monitored, 
paired with sample units representing the project scenario.