2 
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
This methodology is applicable to project activities that aim at complete substitution of gasoline or 
gasoline blends by ethanol in commercial fleets of flex-fuel vehicles. The monitoring plan must 
guarantee exclusive consumption of ethanol by vehicles from the project boundary. This should 
be done using a fuel monitoring system (direct or indirect measurement) with continuous 
registration of place (gas station), date, type and quantity of fuel used in the project activity.  
In order to calculate the baseline emissions, historical fuel consumption pattern shall be analysed 
and a factor that shows the ratio of gasoline to ethanol in the total consumption of fuel by 
commercial fleet shall be calculated. In cases where the project area is not homogenous in terms 
of availability and prices of fuels, it should be stratified into project regions. The fuel consumption 
pattern should be calculated for each project region. Historical fuel consumption pattern is based 
on historical data of the project proponent. In cases when no credible historical data is available 
or in the case of a Greenfield project activity instance, the historical average pattern of the same 
regional group shall be used. 
Additionality shall be demonstrated by applying the latest version of CDM Combined tool to 
identify the baseline scenario and demonstrate additionality. 
The baseline emissions are calculated by applying the determined fuel consumption pattern (ratio 
of gasoline to ethanol in the total fuel consumption during the historical reference period), 
corrected by a fuel conversion factor, to the total quantity of ethanol consumed in the year y of the 
project activity. The fuel conversion factor determines a quantity of ethanol needed to substitute 
one liter of gasoline in the type of vehicles used in the project activity.  
Project emissions are calculated by applying the emission factor to the quantity of gasoline 
consumed in the project activity and monitored in liters.  
The emissions reductions are calculated as the difference between the baseline emissions and 
the project emissions. No leakage emissions are attributed to this project type. 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
 
 
VM0019, Version 1 
Sectoral Scope 7 
 
 
 
Page 7