6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
6.1 
Determination of the Most Plausible Baseline Scenario 
Determination of the most plausible baseline scenario builds on the outcome of the 
additionality analysis (Section 7) and must be consistent with the description of the conditions 
prior to the project start date. VT0001 must be used to assess the project additionality. The 
stepwise approach below must be followed in addition to VT0001 to determine the most 
plausible baseline scenario.   
Step 1: Reuse the plausible alternative land use scenarios to the REDD project activity that 
have been listed as an outcome of Sub-step 1b of the additionality tool VT0001.   
Unless it has been demonstrated that any of these land use scenarios are not credible or do 
not comply with all mandatory applicable legislation and regulations as required by VT0001 
Sub-step 1b, the list of plausible alternative land use scenarios must include at least:  
1) Continuation of the pre-project land use;  
 
VM0007, v1.8 
26 
2) Project activity performed on the land within the project boundary without being registered 
as a VCS REDD project; and  
3) Activities similar to the proposed project activity on at least part of the land within the 
project boundary of the proposed REDD project.  
 
Figure 1: Barrier analysis decision tree 
 
Step 2a: Where the VT0001 barrier analysis is used to demonstrate additionality, apply the 
decision tree in Figure 1 to the list of all alternative land use scenarios from Step 1 that are not 
prevented by any barrier.   
  
Step 2b: Where the VT0001 investment analysis is used to demonstrate additionality, and if at 
least one land use scenario generates financial benefits other than carbon revenues, select the 
baseline scenario as below:   
1) Where VT0001 Option I is used, the baseline scenario is the land use scenario with the 
lowest costs over the crediting period). Option I may only be applied if the alternative 
scenarios do not include revenues.   
 
VM0007, v1.8 
27 
2) Where VT0001 Option II is used, the baseline scenario is the most economically or 
financially attractive land use scenario (i.e., the scenario with the most favorable financial 
indicator such as internal rate of return).  
3) Where VT0001 Option III is used and none of the alternative land use scenarios have a 
financial indicator that meets the benchmark, the baseline scenario is the continuation of 
the pre-project land use. Where Option III is used and at least one of the land use scenarios 
has a financial indicator that meets the benchmark, the baseline scenario is the scenario 
that has the most favorable financial indicator (e.g., internal rate of return, net present 
value or cost-benefit ratio).  
 
Step 3: Where barrier analysis is used to demonstrate additionality but does not allow 
determination of the baseline scenario, implement one of the following:  
1) An investment analysis following VT0001 Option II (regardless of whether it has been used 
to demonstrate additionality). Select the most plausible baseline as specified in Step 2b 
above; or  
2) Through qualitative analysis, estimate the baseline GHG emissions for each alternative land 
use scenario that is not prevented by any barrier. The baseline scenario is the land use 
scenario that allows for the lowest baseline GHG emissions. Estimates must be based on 
publicly available default factors and standards, such as the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for 
National GHG Inventories and its 2019 Refinements or the IPCC 2003 Good Practice 
Guidelines for LULUCF. All other data used must be publicly available and must come from 
recognized, credible sources, such as peer-reviewed literature.    
Quantification of GHG emissions under the selected baseline scenario must follow the 
applicable and relevant activity-type module(s).  
Where project proponents use available data sourced from a jurisdictional baseline that meets 
the requirements set out in the VCS JNR Requirements, those data sources may be used under 
this methodology, where conservative, even where data accuracy may be less stringent than 
required by this methodology. 
6.2 
Re-assessing the Baseline Scenario 
The project baseline must be revised at the frequency set out in the latest version of the VCS 
Standard. 
The date of the next scheduled revision must be specified. The starting point for the baseline 
revision of the project will be the forest cover projected to exist at the end of the baseline 
period. Projections for each baseline revision will be subject to independent validation as set 
out in the latest version of the VCS Standard. 
Reassessments must capture changes in the drivers and/or behavior of agents that cause the 
change in land use and/or land management practices and changes in carbon stocks. The new 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
28 
baseline scenario must be incorporated into revised estimates of baseline emissions. This 
baseline reassessment must include the evaluation of the validity of proxies for GHG emissions. 
For REDD and WRC project activities, ex-ante baseline projections beyond the baseline validity 
period are not required. For this assessment, the historic reference period is extended to 
include the original reference period and all subsequent monitoring periods up to the beginning 
of the current monitoring period.