6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
This methodology considers multiple baseline scenarios, all of which are founded on an 
assessment of pre-project rice management practices, in particular on-season water regime 
management. For each project field, the baseline scenario is derived from practices 
implemented in the (minimum three-year) historical look-back period, creating an annual 
schedule of activities to be repeated throughout the baseline scenario and used to estimate 
baseline emissions and net project emission reductions during each monitoring period. 
Baseline emissions are modeled (QA1), directly measured for soil methanogenesis only (QA2), 
and/or estimated using default emission factors (QA3).  
The practices assumed in the baseline scenario must be reassessed at the end of a project 
crediting period (i.e., when applying for project crediting period renewal) to ensure that they 
reflect the current rice production system in the region.  
Development of Schedule of Activities in the Baseline Scenario  
For each project field, a schedule of activities in the baseline scenario is determined by 
assessment of historical practices implemented during the period prior to the project start date. 
The interval over which practices are assessed, x years, must be a minimum of three years and 
must include at least one complete crop rotation, where applicable. Where a crop rotation is not 
implemented in the baseline, x ≥ 3 years. To develop the schedule of activities, project 
proponents must refer to Table 3 to collect data on all cropping management-related 
parameters (as defined in the “ALM practices” column) for each project field and for each year 
from t = −1 to t = −x (i.e., years preceding project start) of the historical look-back period. In 
addition, project proponents must collect data on machinery operations and liming applications 
(i.e., type, rates, and timing). In most cases, quantitative information is associated with related 
qualitative information (see Box 1 for guidance on and a hierarchy of data sources). Thus, a 
negative response to a qualitative element would mean there is no quantitative information 
related to that practice, whereas a positive response to a qualitative element requires 
quantitative information related to that practice.  
The schedule of activities, beginning with year t = −x, is applied in the baseline scenario from 
t = 1 onward, repeating every x years through the end of the first baseline period. At the end of 
each baseline period, production of the commercial crop (i.e., rice) in the baseline scenario is 
re-evaluated. Published regional (sub-national) agricultural production data from within the five 
years immediately preceding the end of the current baseline period must be consulted. The 
schedule of activities in the baseline scenario is valid until re-assessment is required. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
13
Table 3. Minimum specifications for the identification of agricultural land management 
(ALM) practices in rice production systems in the baseline scenario 
ALM practices 
Qualitative 
Quantitative 
Water regime (pre- 
and on-season) 
• Irrigation (Y/N) 
• Flooding on-season 
(Continuous/Single/Multiple) 
• Flooding pre-season 
(Flooded/Short- or Long-drainage) 
• Irrigation rate/volume 
• Flooding duration (days) 
• Water level (below surface) 
Crop planting and 
harvesting 
• Crop type(s) 
• Rice variety 
• Rice seeding practice 
(DSR/Transplanting) 
• Approximate date(s) of seeding 
• Approximate date(s) 
harvested/terminated 
• Crop yield 
Tillage and/or residue 
management 
• Tillage (Y/N) 
• Crop residue removal (Y/N) 
• Crop residue incorporation (Y/N) 
• Burning crop residue (Y/N) 
• Usage of non-burned crop residue 
(final end-use type) 
• Tillage depth (where applicable) 
• Tillage frequency (where applicable) 
• Tillage area (where applicable) 
• Crop residue rate left in situ (where 
applicable) 
• Crop residue incorporation timing 
(where applicable) 
• Burned area (where applicable) 
Nitrogen fertilizer 
application 
• Organic amendment (Y/N) 
• Organic amendment type(s) 
• Synthetic N fertilizer (Y/N) 
• Synthetic N fertilizer type(s) 
• Organic amendment type 
application rate (where applicable) 
• Synthetic fertilizer type application 
rate (where applicable) 
Other amendments 
• Biochar (Y/N) 
• Methanotrophs (Y/N) 
• Biochar application rate (where 
applicable) 
• Methanotroph application rate 
(where applicable) 
Liming 
• Application of calcitic limestone or 
dolomite (Y/N) 
• Calcitic limestone or dolomite 
application (where applicable) 
• Approximate date(s) of calcitic 
limestone or dolomite application 
(where applicable) 
Machinery and 
equipment operations 
• Fossil fuel usage (Y/N) 
• Fossil fuel type(s) 
• Fossil fuel type rate (where 
applicable) 
*Y/N: Yes/No 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
14 
This may result in a baseline scenario of a continuously flooded on-season water regime (with 
associated management practices, e.g., N fertilizer management and organic amendment 
applications) and the length of flooding conditions pre-season, since this methodology targets 
the transition from continuous flooding to single drainage, and/or the shortened period of 
flooding conditions pre-season, AWD, and/or DSR to reduce CH4 emissions from soil 
methanogenesis. However, where the on-season water regime includes single drainage during 
the historical look-back period, project proponents must conservatively set single-season 
drainage as the on-season water regime for the entirety of the baseline scenario for those 
project fields (i.e., even where there is just one year of single-season drainage during the 
minimum three-year historical look-back period, the schedule of activities for on-season water 
regime must include annual single-season drainage). This represents an alternative baseline 
scenario and is a more conservative approach to baseline setting because it requires projects 
to assume that single-season drainage (which has lower CH4 emissions than continuous 
flooding) would have happened every year of the baseline scenario. Further, in fields where the 
alternative baseline scenario is used, projects must implement the shortened period of flooding 
conditions prior to the start of the cultivation period, multiple drainage events, and/or DSR.6  
Last, in circumstances where actual weather conditions during the monitoring period result in a 
cultivation period with a longer duration than the baseline scenario cultivation period (as 
derived from the schedule of activities), project proponents may set the baseline scenario 
cultivation period equal to the project scenario cultivation period for affected fields during the 
same season of the monitoring period. To qualify for this exception, project proponents must 
demonstrate that the duration of the project scenario cultivation period (from pre-planting to 
harvesting) is commensurate with non-project fields by using data from reference fields in the 
same region as the project area7 or providing other evidence following the data sourcing 
hierarchy in Box 1.   
Box 1. Sources of qualitative and quantitative data  
Sources of information for all activity/management-related variables and all parameters 
relevant to the baseline must follow the requirements detailed below. 
All qualitative information on ALM practices must be determined via consultation with the 
farmer or landowner. Where the farmer or landowner is not able to provide qualitative 
information (e.g., a field is newly leased), the project proponent must follow the quantitative 
information hierarchy outlined below.  
 
6 This ensures that greater CH4 reductions are achieved than would have occurred where implementing solely single-
season drainage in the project scenario.  
7 This ensures that baseline conditions are dynamic and project proponents are not unduly penalized for changes in 
weather conditions that are outside of their control.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
15
The following list specifies the allowable sources of quantitative information on ALM 
practices in descending order of preference, as available:  
1) Historical management records supported by one or more forms of documented 
evidence pertaining to the selected field and period t = −1 to t = −x (e.g., 
management logs, receipts or invoices, farm equipment specifications, logs or files 
containing machine and/or sensor data) or remote sensing (e.g., satellite imagery, 
manned aerial vehicle footage, drone imagery), where requisite information on ALM 
practices can be reliably determined with these methods (e.g., irrigation patterns 
before and during the cultivation period, type and amount of synthetic N fertilizers 
and organic amendments, and the duration of the cultivation period) 
2) Historical management plans supported by one or more forms of documented 
evidence pertaining to the selected field and period t = −1 to t = −x (e.g., 
management plan, recommendations in writing solicited by the farmer or landowner 
from an agronomist). Where more than one value is documented in historical 
management plans (e.g., where a range of application rates are prescribed in written 
recommendations), the principle of conservativeness must be applied and the value 
that results in the lowest expected emissions in the baseline scenario must be 
selected.  
3) A signed attestation from the farmer or landowner where the attested value does not 
deviate significantly from other evidence-supported values for similar fields (e.g., 
fertilizer data from adjacent fields with the same crop, adjacent years of the same 
field, government data on application rates in that area, or statement from a local 
extension agent regarding local application rates). Digital technologies may be used 
to generate farmer attestations. For example, where an application is used to 
present information to a farmer and to digitally record their acceptance of the 
information as accurately reflecting their cultivation practices, such a digital record is 
considered a farmer attestation. The validation/verification body (VVB) must 
determine whether the data are sufficient. In circumstances where this requirement 
is not met, the source listed in 4) below must be used.  
4) Regional (sub-national) average values derived from agricultural census data or 
other sources from within the 20-year period preceding the project start date or the 
10 most recent iterations of the dataset, whichever is more recent. Where estimates 
have been disaggregated by ownership classes, those should be used. The estimates 
must be substantiated with a signed attestation from the farmer or landowner of the 
field during that period. Examples include the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
National Agricultural Statistics Service Quick Stats database and USDA Agricultural 
Resource Management Survey. 
This hierarchy applies to any quantitative inputs required by the model (QA1), direct 
measurements (QA2), and default factors (QA3). The principle of conservativeness must be 
applied in all cases. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
16