3 DEFINITIONS 
Captured CO2 
Carbon dioxide captured from the atmosphere or a point source that would have 
otherwise remained in or been emitted to the atmosphere. Captured CO2 from the 
atmosphere or from sustainable biomass point source emissions are eligible to be 
labelled as carbon dioxide removals. All other captured CO2 is an emission reduction.     
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
5 
Cement 
Portland cement, Portland limestone cement, or blended cement. Blended cement also 
includes supplementary cementitious materials. Portland cement, the most common, is a 
hydraulic cement powder made by grinding a clinker comprised of calcinated limestone and 
other secondary ingredients, including up to 5% limestone. This methodology will simply use 
the term cement to refer to all types. 
Cement replacement 
A material that can fully replace Portland cement as the binder in concrete, often referred 
to as Alternative Cementitious Material (ACM). 
Clinker 
A dark grey nodular material made by heating ground limestone and clay at a 
temperature of about 1400°C - 1500°C. The nodules are ground up to a fine powder to 
produce cement, with a small amount of gypsum added to control the setting properties.  
Concrete  
Concrete is a material traditionally composed of coarse aggregates (e.g., sand, gravel), 
cement or cement replacement, and possibly supplementary cementitious materials that 
hardens upon addition of water and following a curing process to form a stone-like 
substance. Concrete is used in several forms, including ready mix and pre-cast (drycast 
and wetcast).  
Feedstock  
The CO2 captured as part of project activities used along with other materials to produce 
concrete.  
Mix Design  
The masses of ingredients, including cement (or cement replacement), sand, gravel, 
aggregate, water, and any other additives used by a project proponent to produce a unit 
of concrete of a given type and compressive strength. This mix design could be used in 
the project activity and would then be referred to as the project mix design. In addition, 
the mix design could be what would have occurred in the absence of the project activity, 
which is then referred to as the baseline mix design. The baseline mix design is 
determined in order to assess how much cement would have been used in the baseline 
scenario. The same mix design can be used at multiple facilities. 
Precast Concrete 
Concrete that is cast in a mold and then cured in a controlled environment in a 
manufacturing plant, instead of mixing and pouring it at the construction site. Examples 
include concrete masonry, hardscapes, and reinforced concrete elements. 
Supplementary Cementitious Material (SCM) 
Material that is a waste by-product of another industrial process and that contributes to 
the properties of a cementitious mixture through hydraulic or pozzolanic activity, or both, 
without the need for additional thermal processing or calcining. Examples include 
pozzolans like fly ash, slag cement, silica fume, biogenic limestone, biochar etc. 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
6 
Waste CO2 
Carbon dioxide from an anthropogenic source that would have otherwise been emitted 
to the atmosphere.