3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS document Program Definitions, the definitions 
below apply to this methodology. 
Commercial Timber Harvest 
Felling (i.e., removal), transporting and processing of merchantable trees from a forest to 
obtain income from wood products.  
Merchantable biomass 
Is the biomass of trees, crops, or forest stands having the size, quality and condition suitable 
for marketing under a given economic condition, even if not immediately accessible for 
logging1. 
 
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) 
Diameter of the stem/bole outside bark of a tree at 1.3 meters or 4.5 feet. 
 
 
 
1 Definition extracted from the SAF’s Dictionary of Forestry (2018). 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
7 
Forestry Infrastructure 
Physical infrastructure needed to carry out forestry operations, including (but not restricted to) 
roads, skid trails and log landings in the project area. 
Forest Inventory 
A system for measuring the extent, quantity and condition of a forest by sampling through: 
• 
A set of objective sampling methods designed to quantify the spatial distribution, 
composition and rates of change of forest parameters within specified levels of 
precision for the purpose of management; and 
• 
Listing of data from such survey. 
Land Parcel 
The area of land within a forest specified/allocated for annual logging and timber harvesting 
operations as defined in a timber harvest plan.  
Logging Slash 
A component of the deadwood pool, representing the downed or lying woody debris left in the 
forest (on-site) generated during a timber harvest event. 
Planned Timber Harvest 
Planned removal of merchantable trees from a forest to obtain income from the wood 
products under legal conditions for harvest and documented under a timber harvest plan. 
Planted Forest 
A forest that at maturity is predominantly composed of trees established through planting 
and/or deliberate seeding. Planted forests include but is not limited to plantation forests2. 
Plantation forests  
Intensively managed planted forests that at maturity is composed of one or two species, has 
one age class, and has regular tree spacing, Plantation forests are a subset of planted 
forests. 
 
Selective logging  
A timber harvesting technique that involves removing only selected trees based on specific 
characteristics (e.g., diameter, height, species, market value) Unlike clear-cutting, where all 
trees are removed, selective logging means most trees remain in the forest stand with the 
objective of maintaining an uneven-aged structure3  
Timber Harvest Plan 
Description of the methods and operations needed to harvest timber from a forest under a 
given set of legal conditions for harvest that includes: 
 
2 Adapted from FAO (2023) Global Forest Resources assessment (FRA) Terms and Definitions.  
3 Usually applied in tropical managed forests, selective logging intensity varies depending on species abundance, 
distribution and region. Intensity can range between 1-20 trees harvested per hectare over a minimum cutting diameter, 
with average rotation of 25-50 years (Burivalova et al. 2014 Current Biology 24 (16):1893-1898). 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
8 
• 
Demarcation of non-harvest areas within the forest. 
• 
Division of the harvestable forest into annual operating areas (land parcels or 
compartments) presented with descriptions and maps. 
• 
Design and presentation of the transport system for the removal of harvested timber 
products, and a description of the harvest and transport machinery used for timber 
harvest. 
3.1 
Symbols and Notations 
3.1.1 Physical quantities 
This section presents the symbols that are used throughout the methodology to represent 
physical quantities used in the accounting equations. 
Flows of greenhouse gas(es) 
The symbol GHG is the common identifier used throughout this methodology to represent flows 
of greenhouse gas(es) to/from the atmosphere. 
For these flows, the absolute value represents the magnitude of the flow, in tCO2e year-1, or the 
total amounts exchanged with the atmosphere, in tCO2e. 
Carbon stocks 
The symbol C is the common identifier used throughout this methodology to represent carbon 
stocks. The values presented are either carbon stocks (in tC), or carbon stocks per unit area (in 
tC·ha-1) as indicated in the methodology described under Section 8. 
Carbon stock changes 
The symbol ∆C is the common identifier used throughout this methodology to represent 
changes in carbon stocks. The values presented could be either total changes in carbon stocks 
(in tC), annual changes in carbon stocks (in tC·year-1), or annual changes in carbon stocks per 
unit area (in tC·ha-1·year-1), as indicated in the methodology described under Section 8. 
3.1.2 Scenario qualifiers 
This section presents the symbols that are used throughout the methodology as scenario 
qualifiers, for the physical quantities used in the accounting equations as follows: 
• 
Physical quantities referring to the baseline scenario feature the suffix (BSL). 
• 
Physical quantities referring to the project scenario feature the suffix (PRJ). 
• 
Physical quantities derived from baseline and project scenario accounting feature the 
suffix (LtPF). 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
9