3  
APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to project activities which implement RIL-C practices in forests. 
Projects applying this methodology must meet the following applicability conditions: 
1) 
The project activity does not involve a deliberate reduction in harvest levels. The criteria to 
demonstrate no intentional reduction in harvest level are provided in the applicable RIL-C 
performance method module. 
2) 
The project activity and the baseline scenario do not involve conversion of forest to a non-
forest land use/land cover (ie, both represent forests remaining as forests, sensu IPCC GL 
2006). 
3) 
In every year credited, the project proponent must hold legal authorization for all logging 
activities referenced in the project from the relevant government authority.  
4) 
The project area must be located in a logging landscape developed for a corresponding 
region-specific RIL-C performance method module. It must be demonstrated that the entire 
project area is contained within the applicable logging landscape. 
5) 
The entire project area meets the definition of forest, either host country-specific, UNFCCC 
or FAO definition. 
6) 
RIL-C practices implemented as part of the project activity must not increase business-as-
usual levels of impact on pre-existing dead wood stocks through slash management, 
salvage harvesting or other planned removal of dead wood.3  
Requirements for developing a new region-specific performance method can be found in 0.  
                                                     
1  Note that some practices may apply to more than one emission source category. Directional felling, for example, 
can serve to align logs with the planned skidding network, reducing skidding damage, and reduce damage to the 
felled log, improving roundwood recovery. 
2  Note that RIL-C practices do not include slash management, salvage harvesting or other planned removal of dead 
wood. 
3  VVBs need only confirm that this is the case through one of the following: a qualitative assessment of no evidence 
of removal of dead wood onsite (ie, looking for evidence of removal, or comparing dead wood carbon stocks in the 
project area to surrounding areas), interviewing project proponents, reviewing management plans, or a quantitative 
assessment of inventory data of dead wood carbon stocks (if they exist). 
VM0035, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
7