8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
This section presents five approaches to calculating GHG emission reductions (reductions) and 
related monitoring parameters: 
1) adjusted consumption approach; 
2) pre-and post-retrofit audit approach; 
3) control group approach; 
4) deemed savings approach; and  
5) mobile homes approach.  
Equations required to calculate reductions under each approach and monitoring parameters 
applicable to each approach are listed in this section.  
Reductions are calculated directly under each approach; in other words, baseline and project 
emissions are not calculated separately under the methodology. This method results in a 
simplified and accurate estimation of project emissions normalized for weather and electricity 
correction factors. Leakage is calculated separately under each approach. 
Category A. All energy retrofits: calculation of the reductions and monitoring must be based on 
either:  
1) The adjusted consumption approach;  
2) The pre- and post-retrofit audit approach; or 
3) The control group approach.  
Category B. Efficiency enhancements of the building envelope and central heating/cooling: 
calculation of the reductions and monitoring must be based on either:  
1) The adjusted consumption approach;  
2) The pre- and post-retrofit audit approach; or 
3) The control group approach.  
In Category B, electricity must only be included in the calculation of reductions when it is a 
heating or cooling source within the building or dwelling.  
Category C. Appliance replacement: calculation of the reductions and monitoring must be 
based on:  
1) The deemed savings approach. 
Category D. Replacement of a mobile home: calculation of the reductions and monitoring must 
be based on either:  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
23 
1) The adjusted consumption approach;  
3) The control group approach; or  
5) The mobile homes approach. 
8.1 
Adjusted Consumption Approach 
In the adjusted consumption approach, measured energy consumption pre-retrofit, the baseline 
consumption, must be corrected for changes in electricity demand over time and adjusted for 
heating/cooling degree days using an electricity correction factor (ECF) and heating/cooling 
degree day correction factors (HDDCF or CDDCF as applicable). A sample may be used to 
measure energy consumption pre-retrofit. Project consumption of fuel and electricity must be 
subtracted from the adjusted baseline consumption. The result must be multiplied by an 
emission factor for the fuel or electricity used in the baseline. A control group of non-
weatherized, or non-retrofitted, dwellings must be monitored as a quality assurance measure.  
Reductions in the adjusted consumption approach must be calculated as follows: 
ܧܴ௬= ∑
(ܧ݈݁ܿ௕,௜∗ܧܥܨ௬∗ܥܦܦܥܨ௬−ܧ݈݁ܿ௣,௬,௜) ∗ܧ݈݁ܿ஼ை2 +
ூ
௜=௟
∑
(ܨ௕,௜,௝∗
ூ,௃
௜,௝=1
ܪܦܦܥܨ௬−ܨ௣,௬,௜,௝) ∗ܥ݈ܽ௝∗ܨ஼ை2௝−ܮ௬  
(5) 
Where:  
ERy 
= Reductions in year y (t CO2e/yr) 
I 
= Dwelling 
Elecb,i 
= Electricity consumed in the year prior to project implementation for dwelling i 
(baseline consumption) (kWh)14 
Elecp,y,i   
= Electricity consumed by the project in year y for dwelling i (project consumption) 
(kWh) 
ECFy 
= Electricity correction factor for year y to be applied to the baseline 
CDDCFy 
= Cooling degree days correction factor for year y 
HDDCFy 
= Heating degree days correction factor15 for year y 
Fb,i,j 
= Fuel type j consumed in the year prior to project implementation for dwelling i in 
the appropriate mass or volume unit (baseline consumption) 
Fp,y,i,j 
= Fuel type j consumed by the project in year y for dwelling i in the appropriate 
mass or volume unit (project consumption) 
Calj 
= Calorific value of fuel type j (GJ/mass or volume) 
ElecCO2 
= Grid emission factor (t CO2e/kWh) 
FCO2,j 
= CO2 emission factor per unit of energy of fuel type j (t CO2e/GJ) 
Ly 
= Leakage emissions in year y (tCO2/yr) 
 
14 If multiple dwellings within a single building are served by a single meter, the electricity consumption unit must change to 
kWh/m2 and the equation must be multiplied by the area of each individual dwelling. Consequently, the area of each dwelling 
must be recorded and included in the monitoring parameters. 
15 When fossil fuel is the cooling source the CDDCF must replace the HDDCF in the equation. Conversely, when electricity is 
the heating source the HDDCF must replace the CDDCF in the equation.  
 
VM0008, v1.2