4 
APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology is applicable to: 
1. Projects which meet the most recent approved criteria for VCS Improved Forest Management – Logged to 
Protected Forest (IFM-LtPF) eligible projects, and;  
 
2. Projects located in Temperate and Boreal Domain Global Ecological Zones (as defined by FAO (FAO, 2001)) 
which are forest lands remaining forest lands (as defined by IPCC (IPCC, 2003)), and which can meet IPCC 
GPG LULUCF Tier III inventory and data requirements (IPCC, 2003); and, 
 
3. Projects that meet the most current approved VCS Standard requirements for ownership; and, 
 
4. Projects on properties where the starting average annual illegal, unplanned, and fuelwood removals are less 
than 5% of total annual harvest levels (in CO2e) in the baseline scenario1; and, 
 
                                              
1 This methodology does not provide specific equations and methods for the treatment of illegal and unplanned harvesting or fuelwood removal.  
Therefore, projects with non-de minimis levels (determined using the Tool for Testing Significance of GHG Emissions in A/R CDM Projects 
(CDM, 2007a)) of these activities in the starting condition (or as local common practice applicable to the project area) are ineligible.  If 
monitoring reveals conditions change during the project duration, projects will not necessarily be rendered ineligible for this methodology, but 
rather must demonstrate that new non-de minimis illegal or unplanned harvests, and fuelwood removal net emissions reductions are accounted 
for in the project scenario prior to the next verification, in a manner equivalent to the terms LBFELLINGS,i,t and LBOTHER,i,t (see section 8.2.7).  These 
additional equations and methods will constitute a methodology revision, subject to the latest approved VCS revision -approval process.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
6 
5. Projects which do not encompass managed peatland forests (peatland as defined by IPCC GPG LULUCF); 
and, 
 
6. Projects where the total percentage of wetlands in the project area is not expected to change as part of project 
activities; and, 
 
7. Projects that can demonstrate there will be no activity shifting to other lands owned or managed by project 
proponents outside the project boundary at the beginning of the project (within the first year of the project start 
date)2; and, 
 
8. Projects that do not include non-de minimis application of organic or inorganic fertilizer in the project scenario.