2 
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
This methodology provides the procedures for quantifying reductions in scope 1 stationary 
combustion emissions and scope 2 electricity emissions achieved by college, university and 
school campuses in the United States. The methodology consists of two modules: 
VMD0038, Campus-Wide Module; and VMD0039, LEED-Certified Buildings Module, as follows: 
1) Campus-Wide Module 
This module applies to projects targeting campus-wide emission reductions on existing 
college and university campuses in the United States (but does not apply to K-12 
schools). Campuses may implement project activities that reduce scope 1 stationary 
combustion emissions and/or scope 2 electricity emissions. Campuses must meet the 
relevant additionality performance benchmark by applying a series of additionality 
benchmark tests. Emission reductions are quantified based on data from third-party GHG 
reporting programs (eg, ACUPCC, STARS and The Climate Registry) for each year 
relative to a three to five year adjusted baseline. 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Performance Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
2) LEED-Certified Buildings Module 
This module applies to projects targeting emission reductions from LEED-certified New 
Construction or LEED-certified Existing Buildings located on college and university 
campuses and K-12 schools. The building must meet the relevant additionality 
performance benchmark. Emission reductions are quantified based on data generated 
using EPA’s Target Finder tool for each year relative to a crediting benchmark or a three 
to five year adjusted baseline. 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Performance Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Performance Method for New 
Construction and Existing Buildings B; 
Project Method for Existing Buildings A 
This standardized methodology establishes multiple performance benchmarks which US colleges 
and schools can use to determine whether they have achieved a superior level of performance 
that would qualify as additional (additionality benchmark) and to quantify baseline emissions 
(crediting benchmark).  Unlike project methods, performance methods are designed to identify 
the levels of performance (in terms of GHG emission reductions) in a given sector to allow for 
sector-wide benchmarking. Through extensive analyses of historical performance (outlined in the 
modules), this methodology establishes performance benchmarks for campus-wide emission 
reductions and LEED-certified building emission reductions that allow for a series of simple tests 
VM0025, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scopes 1 and 3 
 
Page 7 
 
to be conducted to determine additionality and a crediting baseline. Stakeholder consultation was 
an important part of the development of this methodology, and the process and participants are 
described in Appendix 2. 
Each module provides the detailed procedures for the given type of project activities, adding to 
the common requirements provided in this document. Each module has distinct specifications for 
applicability conditions, project boundary, baseline scenario, additionality, quantification of 
emission reductions, and monitoring. Where both campus-wide and building reductions are 
sought in combination for the same campus, both modules must be applied separately, and the 
relevant emission reductions netted out, as described in Section 8 below. Figure 1 below provides 
a conceptual route map illustrating how this methodology and its two modules are applied. 
Projects must demonstrate right of use for any GHG emission reductions generated by the 
project, in accordance with the VCS Standard (for definition of right of use see VCS program 
document Program Definitions). Where right of use cannot be demonstrated for particular 
emission reductions (eg, for scope 2 emissions addressed by the project), the project proponent 
may choose to include only those emission reductions for which it can demonstrate right of use 
(eg, only include scope 1 emissions for LEED certified building projects). Emission reductions 
arising from a campus’s third-party customer’s use (eg, emission reductions achieved by a 
neighboring hospital which purchases energy from campus on-site energy generation) must be 
excluded from the project. Note that the consumption of energy services provided by off-site 
suppliers (eg, local industry) must be excluded from the scope 1 emissions and included in scope 
2 emissions. 
Where projects generate other forms of environmental credit (eg, renewable energy certificates 
(RECs)), the project must meet VCS rules and guidance on double counting (see VCS Standard, 
Registration and Issuance Process, and VCS guidance on double counting). For example GHG 
emission reductions that arise from the installation of renewable energy systems located on a 
campus, whose GHG-related attributes have been sold as RECs to other third parties must also 
be excluded from the quantification of emission reductions.  Similarly, where RECs from off-site 
renewable installations are purchased by the campus, the lower GHG emissions or the respective 
grid emission factors associated with the RECs cannot be used to decrease project emissions in 
the quantification of emission reductions.  
Emission reduction generated within a region subject to a carbon cap (eg, campuses’ whose 
electricity emissions are included within a regulatory cap and trade program such as that in 
California) must meet the VCS rules regarding emission trading programs and other binding limits 
(ie, double counting) set out in the VCS Standard.  
Where emission reductions are verified and intend to be issued as VCUs, project proponents 
must ensure that such VCUs are accurately reported in accordance with any procedures set out 
under any applicable third-party GHG reporting program under which the campus reports. The 
sale, transfer or retirement of any VCUs must be accurately reported to any applicable third-party 
GHG reporting program during the period where such sale, transfer or retirement occurs. 
 
VM0025, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scopes 1 and 3 
 
Page 8 
 
 
Figure 1: Conceptual Route Map for Methodology 
Select project activities and determine appropriate module(s): 
I.  Campus-wide module for campus-wide activities  
II.  LEED-certified building module for LEED-certified building activities 
III. Both modules for campus-wide and LEED-certified building activities 
 
 
 
Campus-Wide 
 
LEED-Certified Buildings 
Applicability Conditions 
Determine whether activities qualify (eg, ACUPCC 
Carnegie classification of campus, use of third-party 
GHG reporting program, and activities implemented) 
 
Applicability Conditions  
Determine whether activities qualify (LEED New 
Construction (NC), Existing Buildings A (EB-A), or 
Existing Building B (EB-B) and building 
classification higher education, higher education 
laboratory or K-12 School) 
 
 
 
Project Boundary 
Determine the GHG sources, sinks and reservoirs for 
the project and whether new site areas can be 
excluded from the project boundary 
 
Project Boundary 
Determine the GHG sources, sinks and reservoirs 
for the project 
 
 
 
Baseline Scenario 
Determine the baseline scenario for the scope of 
GHG emission reductions that are additional, 
accounting for variance in square footage during the 
baseline period 
 
Baseline Scenario 
Determine the baseline scenario for each building in 
the project by applying a crediting benchmark for 
NC and EB-B, or a historical baseline adjusted for 
energy efficiency improvements for EB-A 
 
 
 
Additionality 
Determine which scope of emission reductions (ie, 
scope 1 stationary combustion emissions and/or 
scope 2 electricity emissions) are additional for the 
given project year, applying the regulatory surplus 
and performance benchmark tests, which account for 
variance in square footage during the baseline period
and weather variances where necessary 
 
Additionality 
Determine which buildings are additional for the 
given project year, applying the regulatory surplus 
and performance benchmark tests 
 
 
 
GHG Emission Reductions 
Quantify the reductions for the relevant scope of 
emission reductions, adjusting for variance in square 
footage during the baseline period and project 
crediting period where necessary 
 
GHG Emission Reductions 
Quantify the reductions for all additional buildings in 
the project using results generated from EPA’s 
Target Finder tool anchored upon the appropriate 
property type and property use details 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring Plan 
Identify the data and parameters that need to be determined at validation, and those that need to be 
determined at each verification event. 
Describe the plan for obtaining, recording, compiling and analyzing monitored data and parameters. 
Where both the campus-wide and LEED-certified buildings modules are applied, create a single 
monitoring plan. 
 
Net GHG Emission Reductions 
Where both the campus-wide and LEED-certified buildings modules are applied, quantify the net 
reductions by subtracting relevant LEED-certified building reductions from the campus-wide total. 
 
VM0025, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scopes 1 and 3 
 
Page 9