8 QUANTIFICATION OF GHG EMISSION 
REDUCTIONS AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
The total baseline GHG emissions are associated with the baseline FLW flows to pre-project FLW 
destination(s) and the transport of the FLW flows. Total baseline GHG emissions are calculated 
using Equation (1). 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑦 = ∑𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦
𝑗
+ 𝐵𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝒋,𝑦 
(1) 
Where: 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑦 
 
Total baseline emissions in year y (tCO2e) 
𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦 
 
Baseline emissions from the FLW destination j in year y (tCO2e) 
𝐵𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑗,𝑦 
Baseline GHG emissions from collection and transport of FLW flows to 
destination j in year y (tCO2e) 
 
16 For example, a project may include both enhanced demand planning and dynamic pricing in a retail location. 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
14 
 
The steps for a project proponent to calculate the total baseline GHG emissions (BEy) are 
illustrated in Figure 2 and explained in detail below.  
 
 
Figure 2: Steps to calculate baseline emissions 
 
1) Map the FLW source and pre-project FLW destination(s), which includes (a) identifying and 
describing all FLW sources and FLW destinations before the project start date within the 
project boundary, and (b) determining the distance between all sources and destinations, 
which will be used in Step 5.  
2) Quantify FLW flows and classify the type of food included. Project proponents are not 
required to use a particular quantification method17 to calculate FLW flows but must 
minimize the degree of uncertainty (see guidance in Chapter 9 of the FLW Standard).18 To 
undertake Step 3, food content in the FLW flows must be described using FAO’s Codex 
General Standard for Food Additives (GSFA)19 system. As a minimum, food ingredients must 
be classified down to the second non-null digit category of the GSFA Codex system (e.g., 01.1 
Fluid milk and milk products). 
3) Calculate the mean dry matter (DM) content20 of FLW flows using default values from the 
USDA FoodData Central database.21 Project proponents must select the water content (which 
is the inverse of the DM content) for the food ingredients that best represent the content of 
the FLW flows according to the classification performed in Step 2. Project proponents may 
 
17 Data on FLW flows may be from direct measurements, inferred from surveys, or indirectly calculated from existing food 
records (e.g., food purchased minus food served). Refer to the FLW Standard for additional guidance on possible 
quantification methods and tradeoffs, and to Appendix 2 for guidance on representative sampling. Representative 
sampling with direct measurements and indirect calculations through food records are typically the preferred option to 
quantify FLW flows as they are usually more accurate than FLW estimated through other methods.  
18 As an example, project proponents may use material flow analysis tools and/or related software to support 
quantification, which minimize accounting errors (e.g., keeps mass balance within the project boundary) and facilitates 
future monitoring of FLW and recovered food flows. 
19 Available at: https://www.fao.org/gsfaonline/foods/index.html 
20 The DM content of discarded food is a critical parameter that determines the amount of GHG (CH4 in particular) 
emissions from waste treatment facilities, especially landfills. The DM content (or alternatively, the water content) varies 
greatly across different types of food (e.g., from 100 percent DM of oils to 5 percent DM of some vegetables). In anaerobic 
conditions like a landfill, most of the dry matter becomes CH4 hence the emission factors from landfill for drier food 
products (with a higher DM content) are greater than those of wetter food products (with a lower DM content). 
21 Online food search available at: https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/. Water content data available for Foundation 
Foods, SR Legacy Foods and Survey Foods (i.e. not Branded Foods). Make sure to download the latest version of the 
database if using the csv or json files. 
(2)  
Quantify FLW 
flows and 
classify the 
type of food 
included 
(1) 
Map the FLW 
source and 
pre-project 
FLW 
destination(s) 
(4)  
Calculate 
baseline GHG 
emissions 
associated 
with the 
destination(s) 
(5)  
Calculate 
emissions from 
collection and 
transport of the 
FLW flows to the 
destination(s) 
(6)  
Sum up 
total 
baseline 
GHG 
emissions 
(3) 
Calculate 
the mean 
dry matter 
content of 
FLW flows 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
15 
 
extend or complement water content data of food ingredients or prepared foods that are not 
listed in the FoodData Central with region- or country-specific food databases available in the 
FAO/Infoods site22 (e.g., WAFCT database for West African food ingredients and recipes). 
i. 
Project proponents must calculate the mean DM content of the FLW flows, which will 
be composed of mixed ingredients from multiple food categories, as follows: 
𝐷𝑀𝑗,𝑦= ∑(1 −𝑊𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑦) ×
𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑖,𝑗,𝑦
𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦
𝑖,𝑗
 
(2) 
 
 
 
 
  
Where: 
𝐷𝑀𝑗,𝑦 
Mean dry matter content of FLW flows going to destination j in 
year y (weight fraction) 
𝑊𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑦 
Default water content of food ingredient or food category i inside 
the FLW flow going to FLW destination j in year y (weight fraction) 
𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑖,𝑗,𝑦 
FLW flow (i.e., mass) pertaining to food ingredient or food 
category i going to FLW destination j in year y (t) 
𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦 
Sum of all FLW flows going to FLW destination j in year y (t) 
i 
Types of food ingredients or food categories in FLW flows 
j 
FLW destinations 
y 
Reporting year 
ii. 
Where project proponents cannot calculate a mean DM content of baseline FLW 
flows, e.g., because they cannot determine the food composition of FLW flows, then 
they must assume either:  
a) for homogeneous FLW flows, i.e. flows for which all food content falls inside one of 
the sixteen food groups of the FAO GSFA system: the highest water content of all food 
ingredients within the food group;   
b) for heterogeneous FLW flows, a mean water content of 73% (i.e. a mean DM 
content of food of 27% as given in the US EPA (2020) report).  
iii. 
Alternatively, project proponents may carry out a sampling to characterize the 
collected FLW flows in terms of mass (𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑖,𝑗,𝑦) and water (𝑊𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑦) content. Please 
see the guidance on representative sampling in Appendix 2 and the associated cited 
references. 
4) Calculate baseline GHG emissions associated with the pre-project FLW destination(s). Project 
proponents must use the decision tree in Figure 3 to determine whether the appropriate 
approach for calculating baseline GHG emissions is using data from the FLW destination 
 
22 Available at: https://www.fao.org/infoods/infoods/tables-and-databases/en/ ; check also 
http://www.langual.org/langual_linkcategory.asp?CategoryID=4&Category=Food%20Composition  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
16 
 
facility in which the pre-project FLW flows are treated or using a default GHG emission factor 
for the relevant FLW destination(s). 
 
 
Figure 3: Decision tree to calculate baseline GHG emissions for FLW destinations (step 4)  
 
The following lays out the equations to use when applying Option 1, 2, or 3 from Figure 3. 
Option 1: Use specific emission factor from FLW destination facility 
If primary data is available from the FLW destination’s facility in which the FLW flows are treated, 
and the facility can provide a GHG emission factor (i.e., CO2e per t biomass) as well as related dry 
matter content for the organic waste it treats, a project proponent must use this emission factor 
as it is more accurate than using a default factor.  
To calculate the specific GHG emissions associated with the FLW flows, when the facility provides 
an emission factor (𝐸𝐹𝑗,𝑦) on a wet basis, the project proponent will need information from the 
facility on the related mean DM (or water) content of all the organic waste treated at the facility 
(𝐷𝑀𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑗,𝑦 below). However, if 𝐸𝐹𝑗,𝑦 is given on a dry basis, then 𝐷𝑀𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑗,𝑦 in Equation (3) 
has a value of 1. 
Project proponents must use the following equation to calculate baseline emissions for the 
project’s FLW destination(s): 
 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦 = 𝜑𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡× 𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦×
𝐷𝑀𝑗,𝑦
𝐷𝑀𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑗,𝑦
×  𝐸𝐹𝑗,𝑦 
(3) 
 
    
Where: 
𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦 
 
Baseline emissions from the FLW destination j in year y (tCO2e) 
𝜑𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡 
Default discount factor of 0.9 to account for model uncertainties in Option 1 
(fraction) 
 
Is primary data available from the 
FLW destination’s facility in which 
the FLW flows are treated?  
Yes 
Can the facility provide 
a GHG emission factor 
(i.e., CO2eq per kilo 
biomass) and the 
related dry matter 
content? 
Use specific emission 
factor for destination 
(Option 1) 
1. If facility is not a landfill, follow 
pathway indicated by “no”.  
2. If facility is a landfill, can the 
landfill operator provide the 
fraction of landfill gas flared at the 
site (i.e., f parameter)? 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Estimate landfill 
destination’s emissions 
associated with FLW flows 
(Option 2)  
No 
No 
Use default 
emission factor for 
relevant FLW 
destination  
(Option 3) 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
17 
 
𝐸𝐹𝑗,𝑦 
Emission factor of FLW destination j in year y (tCO2e/t biomass) 
𝐷𝑀𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑗,𝑦 
Mean dry matter content of the organic waste (i.e., biomass) treated in 
destination j in year y (weight fraction)  
Project proponents may overrule 𝜑𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡 by a calculated discount factor if they are able to 
quantify the uncertainty behind 𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦 and 𝐷𝑀𝑗,𝑦, i.e., only if they have characterized the FLW 
flows through representative sampling (see step 3) and if the facility operator can provide the 
standard deviation of the provided emission factor. The discount factor must be calculated and 
included as per the latest version of the VCS Methodology Requirements, substituting 𝜑𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡 
with (1 – discount factor) in Equation (3). 
 
Option 2: Estimate landfill destination’s emissions associated with FLW flows 
If the FLW flows are treated in a landfill but the facility cannot provide a GHG emission factor or 
related dry matter content for the organic waste it treats, and where a project proponent has 
access to the fraction of methane flared at the solid waste disposal site, Equation (4), must be 
used.23 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦= 𝜑𝑆𝑊𝐷𝑆× (1 −𝑓𝑗,𝑦) × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 × 𝑀𝐶𝐹× 0.3 × 𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝐽,𝑦× 𝐷𝑀𝑗,𝑦 
(4) 
 
Where: 
𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦 
Baseline emissions from the destination landfill j in year y (tCO2e) 
𝜑𝑆𝑊𝐷𝑆 
Default discount factor to account for model uncertainties in Option 2, variable 
according to the climatic conditions (dimensionless, see Section 9)  
𝑓𝑗,𝑦 
Fraction of the CH4 captured, flared, combusted, or recovered at the destination 
landfill j in year y. Monitored parameter (fraction, see Section 9) 
𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4  
Global warming potential of CH4 (tCO2e/t CH4). Use value referenced in the latest 
version of the VCS Standard 
𝑀𝐶𝐹 
Default methane correction factor applied to the destination landfill facility, 
variable according to the type of solid waste disposal site (dimensionless, see 
Section 9) 
0.3 
Default factor that converts the carbon content of dry organic matter to released 
CH4 (t CH4/t DM) 
Option 3. Use default emission factor for relevant FLW destination 
If Options 1 and 2 are not feasible, project proponents must select from the default emission 
factors in Table 2 to calculate the baseline emissions associated with the relevant FLW 
destination. These emission factors are globally representative of the listed FLW destinations, 
 
23 This equation has been adapted from the CDM Methodological Tool 04 Emissions from solid waste disposal sites, v8.0. 
Available at: https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-04-v8.0.pdf 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
18 
 
since the factors are reflective of a specific waste treatment technology rather than geography-
dependent.  
 
Table 2: Default GHG emission factors (tCO2e/t DM) for calculating baseline emissions 
FLW destination  
Emission 
factor (EF) 
Destination 
with 
valorization 
Note 
Anaerobic digestion (wet) a   
0.359 
Yes 
Includes fugitive CH4 and N2O emissions 
from the digester and from digestate 
application on land. Excludes avoided 
emissions from co-product offsets and 
transportation. 
Anaerobic digestion (dry) a   
0.457 
Yes 
Composting a   
0.392 
Yes 
Includes fugitive CH4 and N2O emissions 
from composting. Excludes avoided 
emissions from co-product offsets and waste 
transportation. 
Controlled combustion, 
incineration a   
0.131 
Yes  
Includes non-CO2 emissions from the 
combustion process. Excludes avoided 
emissions from co-product offsets and 
transportation 
Landfill without flaring b 
6.528 
No 
Excludes emissions from transportation  
Landfill with flaring b 
2.222 
Yes 
Excludes avoided emissions from co-product 
offsets and transportation  
Open burning c 
0.141 
No 
Includes non-CO2 emissions from the 
combustion process. Excludes emissions 
from transportation 
Open dump b 
2.285 
No 
Excludes transportation emissions 
Sewer / wastewater d 
0.418 
No 
Includes emissions from electricity 
consumption for wastewater treatment and 
subsequent anaerobic digestion process 
   
a Adapted (i.e., converted from short wet tons to kg DM) from the emission factors in the US EPA (2020) 
report;24 combustion EF from Exhibit 1-44, composting EF from Exhibit 1-43, and wet and dry anaerobic 
digestion EF from Exhibit 1-52 and Exhibit 1-51, respectively. Discount factors (𝜑) of 0.8 have been 
applied. 
b  Adapted from CDM TOOL04 (see Equation 3 in Option 2). Applied MCF value of 1 (landfill with and 
without flaring) and 0.4 (open dump considered as unmanaged shallow solid waste disposal site). Global 
warming potential of biogenic methane from latest IPCC AR6 report. Average flaring factor of 0.61 applied 
(US EPA, 2020). Discount factors (𝜑) of 0.8 (landfill without flaring) and 0.7 (landfill with flaring and open 
dump) applied. 
c  Adapted from Ecoinvent 3.8 database.  
d  Represents the average anaerobic digestion EF from US EPA (2020) plus the GHG emissions from an 
average electricity consumption at wastewater treatment plants for aeration (Ecoinvent 3.8).  
 
The EF in Table 2 include a discount factor to account for model and parametric uncertainties.  
 
24 Available at: https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/documents/warm_organic_materials_v15_10-29-
2020.pdf  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
19 
 
 
Once the relevant EF have been selected from Table 2, the following equation must be used to 
calculate baseline emissions from the pre-project FLW destinations: 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑗,𝑦 =    𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦× 𝐷𝑀𝑗,𝑦×  𝐸𝐹𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑗,𝑦 
(5) 
 
Where:  
𝐸𝐹𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑗,𝑦 
Default EF of the FLW destination j in year y (Table 2) (tCO2e/t DM) 
 
5) Calculate emissions from collection and transport of the FLW flows to the FLW destination(s).  
Equation (6) must be used to calculate emissions from FLW collection and transport to the 
relevant destination(s): 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑗,𝑦 = 𝐷𝑗,𝑦 × 𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦×  𝐸𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑦× .001 
(6) 
 
Where:  
𝐵𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑗,𝑦 
Baseline GHG emissions from collection and transport of FLW flows to 
destination j in year y (tCO2e) 
𝐷𝑗,𝑦 
Distance travelled by the waste collection vehicle for collection of FLW flows 
going to destination j during year y (km). It must correspond to the distance(s) 
between the FLW source and the FLW destination(s), measured, inferred, 
calculated, or estimated in Step 1.  
𝐸𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑦 Emission factor for transportation mode m in year y (kg CO2e/t km). The emission 
factors per transport mode and vehicle type may be taken from DEFRA’s latest 
GHG conversion factors.  
.001 
Conversion factor to convert kg CO2e/t km to tCO2e/t km 
 
6) Sum up total baseline GHG emissions 
To calculate the total baseline GHG emissions (BEy), the baseline emissions associated with the 
FLW destination(s) (calculated in Step 4) must be added to those related to the collection and 
transport of the FLW flows (from Step 5) using Equation (1). 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
Project activity emissions are those related to the new project activities taking place to recover 
food and avoid FLW (i.e., keeping food within the human supply chain) and are calculated using 
Equation (7).  
  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
20 
 
 
𝑃𝐸𝑦 =  𝑃𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑦 +  𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑦 
(7) 
 
Where: 
𝑃𝐸𝑦 
 
Project emissions in year y (tCO2e) 
𝑃𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑦  
Project emissions from transportation to collect and deliver the recovered food in 
year y. This parameter must consider all trips for the different transportation 
stages (e.g., collection, distribution, delivery) and the means required for the 
completion of project activities included in the project boundary (see Equation 
(8); tCO2e) 
𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑦 
Project emissions from electricity consumption or other energy and/or material 
use for additional processing, storage etc. in year y where these processes are 
considered additional for the recovery of food (see Equation (9); tCO2e) 
 
The emission factors per transport mode and vehicle type, as well as per fuel type (energy usage 
for additional processing activities) and electricity consumption (country or regional grid-mix 
average factors), may be taken from DEFRA’s latest GHG conversion factors. To correctly 
calculate transport-related emissions, the transport mode, vehicle type and distances traveled 
must be known. Transport emissions are calculated using Equation (8). 
 
𝑃𝐸𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑦 = ∑
𝐷𝑚,𝑥,𝑦
𝑚,𝑥
  × 𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑚,𝑥,𝑦×  𝐸𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑦× .001 
(8) 
 
Where:  
𝐷𝑚,𝑥,𝑦 
Distance travelled by transport mode m for the collection of recovered food flows 
going from the FLW source to new destination x during year y (km) 
𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑚,𝑥,𝑦 
Sum of recovered food flows going from the FLW source to new destination x by 
transport mode m during year y (t). The sum of recovered food flows (𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑚,𝑥,𝑦) 
must be equal to the sum of FLW flows used in the baseline emissions 
calculation (𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑗,𝑦) 
𝐸𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑦 Emission factor for transportation mode m in year y (kg CO2e/t km). The emission 
factors per transport mode and vehicle type may be taken from DEFRA’s latest 
GHG conversion factors 
.001 
Conversion factor to convert kg CO2e/t km to tCO2e/t km 
 
To estimate transport details, the project proponent must determine the distances between the 
FLW source and the new destinations (𝐷𝑚,𝑥,𝑦) and transport modes (𝑚). This may be determined 
by surveying a representative sample of project activity beneficiaries. The average distance 
traveled in the representative sample must be used to extrapolate transportation emissions to 
the whole population reached by the project activities.  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
21 
 
The emission factors per transport mode and vehicle type may be taken from the latest GHG 
conversion factors of DEFRA25. To correctly calculate transport-related emissions, the transport 
mode, vehicle type, and distances traveled between the source(s) and destination(s) of the 
recovered food flows must be known. 
The processing emissions are calculated using Equation (9). 
 
𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑦= 𝑃𝐸𝐸𝐶𝑦 +  𝑃𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑦 +  𝑂𝐸𝑦 
(9) 
 
Where:  
𝑃𝐸𝐸𝐶𝑦  
Project emissions from electricity consumption associated with the processing of 
recovered food flows (𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑚,𝑥,𝑦) in year y (tCO2e). These emissions must be 
calculated with the CDM Methodological TOOL05: Tool to calculate baseline, 
project and/or leakage emissions from electricity consumption and monitoring of 
electricity generation.26 
𝑃𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑦 
Project emissions from fossil fuel consumption associated with the processing of 
recovered food flows (𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊𝑚,𝑥,𝑦) in year y (tCO2e). These emissions must be 
calculated with the CDM Methodological TOOL03: Tool to calculate project or 
leakage CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion.27 
𝑂𝐸𝑦 
Other emissions from the consumption of additional materials needed for 
processing and delivering the new food product (e.g., packaging) in year y 
(tCO2e). Additional minor ingredients, such as food additives, preservatives, etc., 
may be excluded from project emission calculations where they comprise less 
than 1 percent of the recovered and processed food mass (see Equation (10)). 
Other emissions from consumption of additional materials (e.g., packaging) are calculated using 
Equation (10), unless shown to be de minimis. Project proponents should strive to minimize GHG 
emissions from the use of packaging materials by first minimizing the use of packaging as much 
as possible and second, when necessary, selecting low-impact packaging (e.g., recycled 
materials). Emission factors for the most common packaging materials are provided in Table 3. 
 
𝑂𝐸𝑦= ∑
𝑀𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑝,𝑦 × 𝐸𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑝
𝑝𝑦
 
(10) 
 
Where:  
𝑀𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑝,𝑦  
Mass of additional material type p used in the project scenario in year y (t) 
𝐸𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑝 
Emission factor for material type p (Table 3) (tCO2e/t material type p) 
 
25 Factors for 2022 available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/greenhouse-gas-reporting-conversion-
factors-2022 
26 Available at: https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-05-v3.0.pdf  
27 Available at: https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-03-v3.pdf 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
22 
 
 
 
Table 3: Emission factors for common packaging materials 
 
Source: EPA, Documentation for GHG Emission and Energy Factors Used in the Waste Reduction Model (WARM): 
Containers, Packaging, and Non-Durable Good Materials Chapters v15. November, 202028.  
8.3 
Leakage 
8.3.1 Total Leakage Emissions 
The total leakage emissions for a project occurring in year y (LEy) are calculated as the sum of the 
leakage emissions from eventual discards (𝐿𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑦, section 8.3.2) and the leakage emissions 
 
28 https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/documents/warm_containers_packaging_and_non-
durable_goods_materials_v15_10-29-2020.pdf 
Category 
Emission factor 
(tCO2e/t material) 
Common examples of use/description 
Corrugated container board 
(Fiberboard or fluter 
fiberboard) 
0.91 
Corrugated cardboard made from gluing fluted 
corrugating medium 
Polylactic Acid (PLA) 
2.70 
Constructed from renewable agricultural products, 
PLA is considered a "greener alternative" packaging 
option. Includes rigid packaging. 
Common uses: folding boxes, disposable cups, 
cutlery, bottles, films, carpet, apparel, and more. 
Polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) Plastic Rigid 
packaging 
2.44 
PET is also known as polyester. 
Common uses: Water bottles, other packaging. 
High Density Polyethylene 
(HDPE) Plastic Rigid 
packaging 
1.68 
Harder and more rigid than PET.  
Common uses: Bottles, packaging containers, 
cooking oil jugs, milk cartons, bottle caps. 
Low Density Polyethylene 
(LDPE) Plastic flexible 
packaging 
1.98 
Flexible packaging material. 
Common uses: film applications like poultry 
wrapping, trash bags. 
Linear LDPE (LLDPE) 
Plastic flexible packaging 
1.74 
High strength film applications, resistant to puncture. 
Virgin glass 
0.66 
Virgin glass assumes 5% recycled content.  
Recycled materials 
0.00 
Packaging made from a substantial amount (>50%) 
of material recovered or diverted from the non-
hazardous solid waste stream, that may otherwise be 
produced using raw or virgin materials.  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
23 
 
from recovering food that would have otherwise been transformed into co-products in FLW 
destinations with valorization (𝐿𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦, section 8.3.3), as shown in Equation (11).  
𝐿𝐸𝑦=  𝐿𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑦 +  𝐿𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦 
(11) 
 
Where: 
𝐿𝐸𝑦 
 
Total leakage emissions in year y (tCO2e) 
𝐿𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑦 
Leakage due to eventual discards of recovered food in year y (tCO2e) 
𝐿𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦 Leakage due to recovering food from FLW destinations with valorization in year y 
(tCO2e) 
8.3.2 Leakage from Eventual Discards 
A project that prevents FLW at a certain point in the supply chain may still result in food discarded 
later in the supply chain; this is referred to as “eventual discard” in this methodology. The risk of 
leakage from eventual discard will depend on the type of FLW addressed by project activities, 
where in the food chain the project activities intervene, the activity type, and consumer behavior 
related to the project. For example, the risk of leakage in a project that addresses food recovery 
by consumers (e.g., an app where consumers make a conscious choice to recover food) likely has 
lower risk of leakage than a project that keeps food in the human chain at the farm or retailer 
level, but still depends on someone to eat, immediately process, or deep freeze (and not discard) 
the recovered food. A project that recovers food and processes it to produce a new product (e.g., 
fruit that does not meet retail quality standards is collected and processed as jam) may 
considerably extend the shelf life of that food, thereby reducing the risk of leakage from eventual 
discards. 
Project proponents must present evidence that the food recovered in the project is not disposed 
of downstream, e.g., if the project activity adds a treatment process that preserves food 
prolonging its shelf life by a certain amount of time (as presented in the new label of the 
recovered food). Such evidence may be from peer-reviewed literature, expert testimony, 
measurements, surveys, or monitoring of key parameters.  
Where evidence does not exist, an adjustment for leakage must be applied to all projects to 
reflect the probability that the recovered food is discarded. In these cases, leakage emissions 
from eventual discards must be calculated using a default leakage factor, which represents the 
percentage of recovered food that would eventually end up, on average, in an FLW destination. 
Default leakage factors for USA and EU are presented in Table 4 and Table 5, respectively:  
• 
Table 4 provides default leakage factors according to food types and the point in the 
supply chain at which the project activity is implemented. These are based on average 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
24 
 
food loss statistics reported by the USDA29 (values for 2019) and as proxies contain 
several assumptions.  
• 
Table 5 provides default leakage factors based on a recent study that covers the former 
28 countries of the EU (Caldeira et al., 2019; i.e., including the United Kingdom). The 
leakage factors for the EU have higher granularity than those presented for the US; 
estimated food waste in Table 5 is reported for every stage of the food supply chain.  
Project proponents must use the leakage factors that best represent the recovered food items, 
making a weighted average of the food-mix where more than one food type is recovered. Leakage 
factors of broader categories must be used where no specific data on the composition of the 
recovered food-mix are available. When selecting leakage factors, the most conservative option 
must be chosen.  
To apply leakage factors for other geographies, project proponents must use country-specific data 
from national statistics or reports on FLW, if available. Where national data are unavailable, 
project proponents must use FAO’s FLW database.30 Where country-specific data are not 
available for a certain food group and food supply chain stage in FAO’s database, project 
proponents must use regional statistics from the same source (e.g., if primary production losses 
for fruits and vegetables are not available for Afghanistan, then use the FLW average of the same 
food group and supply chain stage for West and Central Asia). 
 
Table 4: Default leakage factors for recovered food per food type and supply chain stage 
for US projects (USDA, 2019) 
Food Group Category 
Primary 
Production 
(percent) 
Retail 
(percent)a 
Final Consumer 
(percent)b 
Meat, fish, eggs 
27 
5 
22 
Meat 
- 
4 
23 
Fish and seafood 
- 
8 
31 
Eggs 
- 
7 
21 
Dairy products 
0 
11 
20 
Beverage milks 
0 
12 
23 
Cheese  
0 
6 
24 
Fruits 
18 
12 
21 
Grains 
0 
12 
20 
Nuts 
0 
6 
19 
Vegetables 
31 
9 
23 
Fats 
0 
21 
22 
 
29 Available at: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-availability-per-capita-data-system/food-availability-per-
capita-data-system/#Loss-Adjusted%20Food%20Availability  
30 Available at: https://www.fao.org/platform-food-loss-waste/flw-data/en/  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
25 
 
Oils 
0 
21 
10 
Legumes 
0 
6 
10 
a Rates noted here include retail, distribution, manufacturing, and processing. 
b Food services are considered a final consumer together with residential households. 
 
Table 5: Default leakage factors for recovered food per food type and supply chain stage 
for EU projects (Adapted from Caldeira et al., 2019)  
Food Group 
Category 
Primary 
Production 
(percent) 
Processing & 
Manufacturing 
(percent) 
Retail & 
Distribution 
(percent) 
Food 
Services 
(percent) 
Households 
(percent) 
Meat 
0.8 
4.7 
2.8 
11.8 
2.8 
Fish 
0.0 
37.8 
2.4 
6.1 
3.7 
Dairy 
3.3 
7.2 
2.6 
27.6 
3.9 
Eggs 
4.8 
1.6 
1.6 
17.7 
4.8 
Cereals 
1.5 
3.2 
2.2 
10.2 
2.8 
Fruit 
16.3 
9.0 
1.2 
12.7 
2.2 
Vegetables 
19.6 
3.8 
1.3 
17.8 
3.2 
Potatoes 
2.8 
4.9 
0.7 
11.4 
1.9 
Sugar beets 
2.6 
0.0 
0.3 
1.1 
0.3 
Oil crops 
2.5 
28.2 
0.3 
4.0 
0.8 
Where a leakage factor is used (i.e., a percentage of the baseline scenario given eventual 
discard), the generic leakage emissions due to eventual discards are calculated as follows: 
𝐿𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑦 = ∑
𝐵𝐸𝑖,𝑗,𝑦
𝑖,𝑗
× 𝐿𝐹𝑖,𝑙 
(12) 
 
Where: 
𝐵𝐸𝑖,𝑗,𝑦  
Baseline emissions from recovered food ingredient or food category i associated 
with the FLW destination j in year y (Step 4, Section 8.1) (tCO2e)  
𝐿𝐹𝑖,𝑙 
 
Leakage factor of food category i in the food supply stage l relevant to the project 
(percent, see default factors in Table 4 and Table 5) 
8.3.3 Leakage from Recovering Food from FLW Destinations with Valorization 
Where the FLW is valorized by the facility that receives it (e.g., for land application or energy 
generation), GHG emission reductions can be minimal. All project activities that divert food from 
an FLW destination facility with valorization must consider additional leakage emissions 
(𝐿𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦). The FLW destinations with valorization are those with a “Yes” in the column 
“Destinations with valorization” in Table 2.  
The following steps must be considered for any FLW that is diverted from a destination with 
valorization: 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
26 
 
Step 1. Demonstrate one of the following: 
(i) 
There is a surplus of FLW or a similar biomass residue in the project region, which the 
project does not utilize. Project proponents must provide evidence that demonstrates the 
total quantity of biomass residue (e.g., for energy generation or as feedstock) annually 
available in the project region is at least 25 percent larger than the quantity of FLW which 
is utilized annually in the project;  
(ii) If the FLW were not diverted, it would not have been collected or utilized (e.g., as fuel, 
fertilizer, or feedstock) but would have been dumped and left to decay, landfilled with no 
energy recovery, left in the field to decay after harvest, or burnt without energy 
generation. Project proponents must provide evidence to support this scenario. 
 
Step 2. In the absence of evidence to demonstrate one of the scenarios outlined in Step 1, 
projects must use Equation (13) to quantify leakage emissions (𝐿𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦). This equation 
has been adapted from Equation 9 in the CDM Methodological Tool 16 Project and leakage 
emissions from biomass, v4.0.31 
𝐿𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦 = ∑𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝐿𝐸 × 𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊,𝑗,𝑦
𝑗
× 𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑦 
(13) 
 
Where: 
𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝐿𝐸 
CO2 emission factor of the most carbon intensive fossil fuel used in the country 
(tCO2/GJ, see Section 9)  
𝑀𝐹𝐿𝑊,𝑗,𝑦 
Mass of FLW diverted from FLW destination j with valorization in year y (t) 
𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑦 
 
Net calorific value of FLW in year y (GJ/t, see Section 9) 
8.4 
Net GHG Emission Reductions  
The net GHG emission reductions are calculated as follows: 
𝐸𝑅𝑦= 𝐵𝐸𝑦 –  𝑃𝐸𝑦 –  𝐿𝐸𝑦  
(14) 
Where: 
𝐸𝑅𝑦 
 
Net GHG emissions reductions from project activities in year y (tCO2e) 
 
 
31 https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-16-v4.pdf  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
27