4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to project activities that introduce energy efficiency and fuel-switch 
measures in cookstoves. 
This methodology is applicable where all of the following conditions are met: 
1) The project activity corresponds to: 
a) Replacement of non-renewable biomass (e.g., firewood, charcoal)-fired cookstoves 
with any of the following: 
i) 
More efficient project devices that use the same fuel as in the baseline; 
ii) 
Efficient project devices fired by renewable biomass or bioethanol; 
iii) 
Efficient project devices fired by liquefied petroleum gas (LPG); or  
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
8 
iv) 
Electric-powered project devices. 
b) Replacement of solid or liquid fossil fuel (e.g., coal, kerosene)-fired cookstoves with 
any of the following: 
i) 
Efficient project devices fired by renewable biomass or bioethanol; 
ii) 
Efficient project devices fired by LPG; or  
iii) 
Electric-powered project devices. 
2) Project devices are used in households, communities, institutions, or small or medium 
enterprises (SMEs),4 collectively referred to in this methodology as the “target 
population.” 
Use of renewable biomass 
3) Where renewable biomass is used, it is exclusively renewable5 and qualifies as one of 
the following: 
a) A by-product, residue, or waste stream from agriculture, forestry, and related 
industries; or 
b) Originating from dedicated plantations that comply with all relevant applicability 
conditions in the most recent version of CDM TOOL16. 
4) Where biomass residues are used, they would have been left to decay or burned 
without energy recovery before implementation of the project activity, and their use 
does not involve a decrease in carbon pools – in particular of dead wood, litter, or soil 
organic carbon – on the land areas from which the biomass residues originate. 
5) Where biomass residues from a production process are used, project implementation 
does not result in an increase in the processing capacity of raw input or any other 
substantial changes (e.g., product change) in this process. 
6) Where more than one type of renewable biomass is used, each of the biomass types 
used complies with the applicability conditions.  
Note – Renewable biomass may be processed into fuels, such as briquettes, wood chips, or 
charcoal. 
7) Where project activities introduce renewable biomass as charcoal, it is renewable 
charcoal produced by efficient charcoal production processes6 (e.g., retort sedentary 
 
4 This includes micro enterprises. 
5 Refer to EB 23 Annex 18 for definition of renewable biomass; available at: 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/EB/023/eb23_repan18.pdf  
6 Where kilns emit a minimal amount of methane during the charcoaling process (i.e., an efficient process is 
employed that results in high charcoal yield) and the small amount of methane that is emitted is captured and 
used or destroyed. 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
9 
kilns, improved sedentary kilns, Casamance kilns). Methane produced during the 
charcoaling process is captured and destroyed or combusted for energy purposes. 
Cookstove characteristics7 and use 
8) Project devices using renewable biomass (fuel-switch) or non-renewable biomass 
(improved efficiency) are single-pot, multi-pot portable, or in-situ cookstoves with an 
initial thermal efficiency8 of at least 25%.9 
9) Project devices using LPG or bioethanol are single-pot, multi-pot portable, or in-situ 
cookstoves with an initial thermal efficiency of at least 30%. 
10) Electric project devices10 meet the maximum risk factor score of 15 on the Cookstove 
Durability Protocol11 and have the following minimum thermal efficiency: 
a) Hot plates and electric hobs: 40% 
b) Induction stoves and other electric stoves: 70% 
11) Project devices using LPG comply with all of the following conditions: 
a) The baseline fuel either includes non-renewable biomass or is a more carbon-
intensive fossil fuel (demonstrated by the baseline survey, see Section 6.2); 
b) The project has a provision for metering LPG supplied to each consumer at the 
LPG filling station, in order to determine household LPG consumption; and  
c) The project does not seek to issue any carbon credits for periods after 31 
December 2045. 
12) Electric project devices use the following electricity sources: 
a) Decentralized renewable energy systems: Decentralized energy systems using 
fossil fuels are not eligible, except for backup generators that supply less than 
1% of the annual electricity of the decentralized renewable energy system.12  
b) Self-generated renewable electricity (with a maximum of 20% electricity from 
non-renewable sources for backup); or 
 
7 Only thermal efficiency and durability of cookstoves are evaluated. 
8 Initial thermal efficiency for a new stove, which is expected to deteriorate during the project lifetime 
9 Efficiency thresholds of 20% (Tier 2), 30% (Tier 3), and 40% (Tier 4) from ISO/TR 19867-3, available at: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/73935.html  
10 Defined as clean technologies by WHO; see https://www.who.int/tools/clean-household-energy-solutions-
toolkit/module-7-defining-clean 
11 The Cookstove Durability Protocol (endorsed by the Clean Cooking Alliance) provides methods for evaluating 
cookstove durability by carrying out a range of targeted tests. Each test incorporates a numeric scoring method 
and cookstoves are scored based on their (durability) risk level. The higher the risk of durability issues, the higher 
the overall score. The most recent version of the protocol is available here. 
12 This restriction aims to avoid the introduction of new, inefficient fossil fuel-fired electricity generation to fuel 
electric cookstoves. 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
10 
c) National or regional electricity grid. 
13) The project proponent designs incentive mechanisms to reduce the use of inefficient 
baseline devices and practices that can be replaced by the project devices and 
describes these mechanisms in the project description. 
14) Where a project device has ended its technical life, the project proponent either 
replaces it with a comparable or better project device or retrofits its essential 
components to continue meeting the minimum service level requirements (i.e., thermal 
energy generation), otherwise no further emission reductions may be claimed for the 
project device. 
Avoiding harm and double counting 
15) Project proponents implement a method for the distribution and identification of project 
devices that avoids double counting of emission reductions by other mitigation actions 
and includes unique product identification on the stove itself at the time of 
distribution/sale (e.g., program logo, alpha/numeric ID, and end-user location, such as 
geographic coordinates, complete address information).  
16) The project complies with any national, sub-national, or local regulations or guidance 
for the installation, commercialization, distribution, and use of improved cookstoves 
and/or fuel supply and use for the target population. National, regional, and local 
regulatory frameworks for the provision of the type of thermal energy services provided 
by the project activity must be documented.  
17) Where project activities reduce emissions from non-renewable biomass, including 
firewood and charcoal, the risk of double counting is assessed on a national basis by 
evaluating at validation and crediting period renewal whether there are REDD+ projects 
or jurisdictional REDD+ programs whose project boundary overlaps with the expected 
fuel source area of the project. The project proponent must report on the findings of 
this assessment for informational purposes in the project description.  
Note – In the future, the VCS Program may adopt further requirements or guidelines related to 
the risk of double counting between improved cooking and REDD+ activities.