49 
REDD 
Information required to periodically reassess the project baseline must be collected during the 
entire project crediting period. Key variables to be measured are: 
• 
Changes in forest cover in the Reference Regions for Deforestation (RRD) (at a minimum 
of every 10 years), as specified in Module M-REDD and where relevant in Module BL-UP. 
• 
Spatial variable datasets used to model the location of deforestation, as specified in 
Module BL-UP. As a minimum, the variables used in the first baseline assessment must 
be monitored at the time of the re-assessment to determine if they have changed. 
• 
Where required, carbon stock data, as specified in Module M-REDD. 
WRC 
In projects with a WRC component, the information required to periodically reassess the project 
baseline must include changes in the drainage layout and climate variables, as specified in 
Module BL-PEAT or BL-TW and, where relevant, Modules BL-UP and BL-PL and any technical 
guidance specified in the monitoring plan. 
Carbon stocks in most cases will not have to be monitored during the baseline period, except in 
the following cases: 
• 
Where there is an increased accuracy and precision of the ex-ante carbon stock 
estimates, which are also used for ex-post calculations. Verifiable evidence must be 
provided to VCS verifiers that the accuracy and precision of the carbon stock estimates 
have improved, compared to previous estimates. Any change in carbon stock densities 
will be subject to validation. 
• 
Where emissions reductions/removals are claimed for avoiding forest degradation 
caused by extraction of wood for fuel or charcoal or carbon sequestration in forest land 
that would have been deforested in the baseline case. In such cases, the methods 
described in Module M-REDD.  
Carbon stocks must be reassessed at every baseline revision. 
Where emissions are included in the baseline, they must be monitored in the project case, 
following the methodological procedures described in the emission modules (E-BPB, E-FFC, and 
E-NA).  
The calculations of actual carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions must be reported 
using transparent procedures. 
Changes in water depths in the project area (and leakage belt for unplanned deforestation), must 
be measured before each verification as part of the monitoring. Methods must be consistent with 
those given in Module M-PEAT or M-TW and any technical guidance specified in the monitoring 
plan. 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
50 
Monitoring of leakage emissions 
All significant sources of leakage identified are subject to monitoring, following the procedures 
outlined in the monitoring plan. Such procedures must be consistent with the applicable leakage 
modules (LK-ASP, LK-ASU, LK-ME, and LK-ECO). All relevant parameters in the leakage modules 
must be included in the monitoring plan. 
TASK 2: Revising the baseline for future project crediting periods 
Baselines must be revised over time because agents, drivers, and underlying causes of 
deforestation as well as drainage layouts and climate variables change dynamically. The 
methodological procedure used to update the baseline must be the same as used in the first 
estimation.