3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions, the following definitions 
apply to this methodology. 
Accelerated retirement  
The ceasing of operations, decommissioning of equipment, and remediation of a coal fired 
power plant earlier than would have occurred in the absence of the project activity. 
Accelerated retirement date 
The date on which the coal-fired power plant relevant to the project ceases operation because 
of the project activities. Accelerated retirement date is the start date of the project activity and 
crediting period.  
Baseline retirement date 
The date on which the coal-fired power plant relevant to the project would have been retired 
due to technical, regulatory, or economic drivers, in the absence of the project activity. 
Coal-fired power plant (CFPP)  
An installation that generates electric power from coal combustion. Several power units at one 
site may comprise one power plant, whereas a power unit is characterized by the fact that it can 
operate independently from other power units at the same site. A single unit of the power plant 
may also be referred to as a coal-fired power plant (CFPP). Plants operating as combined heat 
and power plants and plants with mixed fuels (e.g., biomass, waste) are not included.  
Commitment date 
The date on which the project proponent commits to retire the coal-fired power plant that is 
relevant to the project. Listed in descending order of preference, this is based on the date on 
which the project proponent terminates: 
• 
long-term power purchase agreements (PPAs) or electricity supply agreements with the 
utility, 
• 
long-term coal supply contracts, or  
• 
operating agreements with the plant operator.  
 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
6 
Deregulated electricity market  
An electricity market in which market participants (independent power producers) other than 
the system operator own power plants. In a deregulated market, the independent power 
producers sell electricity to the wholesale market, typically to an off-taker or retail energy 
supplier that provides electricity to end customers. Such markets allow for price competition 
and choice of electricity supplier.   
Grid  
In this methodology, the electricity system that connects the project coal-fired power plant to 
other power plants and consumers through transmission and distribution lines in the host 
country. The grid extent is limited to the smaller of that which is managed by a single balancing 
pool operator, system operator, or the national jurisdictional border within which the project 
activity occurs. 
Independent power producer (IPP) 
A legal entity or instrumentality that owns facilities for the generation of electricity and sells 
electricity to an electric utility under a power purchase agreement. In this methodology, an IPP 
is understood to include all members of an IPP consortium, including their parent or holding 
companies, and when an IPP is, or when an IPP consortium has among its members, a state-
owned company such as in a Public Private Partnership, the host country.  
Just transition (JT) 
A set of principles, processes and practices that aim to ensure that no people, workers, places, 
sectors, countries or regions are left behind in the transition from a high-carbon to a low-carbon 
economy.1 
Just transition plan 
A set of criteria and procedures developed using VMD0061 that ensure stakeholder inclusion, 
fair representation, transparency, and mitigation of negative impacts on livelihoods and the 
environment, in the implementation of accelerated retirement of coal-fired power plants. 
Mine-mouth power plant 
A coal-fired power plant that is constructed and operates near a coal mine, where the coal-fired 
power plant is the anchor buyer of the coal from the mine and the coal is transported directly to 
the coal-fired power plant (e.g., via a conveyor belt) 
Mothballed power plant 
A coal-fired power plant that has been deactivated or put into an inactive state and could return 
to operation 
 
1 Taken from Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2022). Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate 
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/ 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
7 
Off-taker 
An entity that has a power purchase agreement with the independent power producer for all or 
part of the electricity produced, for self-consumption or sale to another consumer. In the case 
of a regulated market, only the system operator acts as the off-taker.  
Paired renewable electricity 
Electricity generated by grid-connected renewable energy that is constructed after the 
commitment date to accelerated retirement. Pairing of renewable electricity is demonstrated in 
a pairing plan through one of the following pairing pathways: 
• 
Contractual pairing: A new or revised coal-fired power plant (CFPP) power purchase 
agreement (PPA) covers new renewable electricity generation capacity. 
• 
Financial pairing: The conditions for refinancing a CFPP for retirement require new 
renewable electricity generation capacity. 
• 
On-site pairing: New renewable electricity generation capacity is developed at the CFPP 
site and uses existing grid connection or balance of plant components. 
• 
Regulatory pairing: A regulator approves new renewable electricity generation capacity 
as an explicit replacement for retired CFPP generation capacity. 
• 
Counterfactual plans pairing: New renewable electricity generation comes online earlier 
or at a greater capacity than projected in the current approved regulatory resource plan 
of the system operators. 
Power purchase agreement (PPA) 
A contract between an independent power producer and an off-taker. In this methodology, 
power purchase agreements: 
• 
refer to agreements in which the off-taker is a utility or electricity system operator or a 
distribution company or power trader.  
• 
are considered long-term where the term of the PPA is at least 20 years.  
Regulatory-determined reserve margin target 
The minimum reserve margin (expressed as a percent) mandated by the regulatory authority 
responsible for the grid, to meet a specific grid reliability target or simply to ensure grid 
reliability. 
Regulated electricity market 
An electricity market with an integrated utility company that is the system operator, owns the 
power system transmission and distribution (including all associated infrastructure), and 
generates and/or purchases wholesale electricity from independent power producers to sell to 
customers. The market is overseen by a public regulator with the authority and mandate to 
ensure consumers have access to reliable electricity at a reasonable cost.  
 
VM0052, v1.0 
8 
Regulated utility 
An integrated utility company that is the system operator, owns the power system transmission 
and distribution (including all associated infrastructure), and may generate or purchase 
wholesale electricity from independent power producers to sell to customers. A regulated utility 
is overseen by a public regulator with rate-making authority, mandated to provide consumers 
with access to reliable electricity at a reasonable cost.    
Reserve Margin 
The unused and available generation capacity of an electric power system at peak load as a 
percentage of the electric power system’s total supply capacity2. When availability of capacity 
varies or some generation capacity is not available during hours of expected peak load, a 
weighted average may be used.  
System operator 
Entity responsible for day-to-day electricity grid management and operations, including 
scheduling and dispatching electricity from power plants while coordinating use of the 
transmission system. Irrespective of the nature and structure of the electricity market, the 
system operator typically remains independent. In a regulated market, the system operator acts 
as the single buyer (off-taker) of electricity from independent power producers and provides 
electricity to different consumers. In a deregulated market, the system operator ensures non-
discriminatory access to the transmission system for independent power producers to provide 
electricity to their respective off-takers and consumers.