4  
APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology is applicable for grouped projects for the quantification of direct and indirect reductions 
of GHG emissions arising from energy efficiency and waste management project activity instances at 
client facilities (project units).  
The requirements of this methodology have been designed to meet micro energy efficiency and/or waste 
diversion project units where the maximum emission reductions from an individual project unit is 5,000 
tCO2e/year. Therefore, through a combination of energy efficiency and waste management activities, 
project units within a grouped project could have a maximum combined abatement threshold of 10,000 
tCO2e/year. While each client facility, or project unit, may only contribute a modest abatement (10,000 
tCO2e/year or less), the total sum of abatement from all project units within this entire grouped project 
may exceed the combined threshold of 10,000 tCO2e/year. 
This methodology is applicable for grouped projects for the quantification of direct and indirect reductions 
of GHG emissions arising from energy-efficiency and waste-diversion projects at client facilities. Projects 
can be located in residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial buildings/facilities. The project 
proponent must demonstrate right of use in respect of the project’s GHG emission reductions, which may, 
for example, entail securing right of use from client facilities. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
18 
Energy Efficiency  
This methodology is applicable to ECMs where the project activity is the construction of new facilities, the 
retrofit of existing facilities, or process/management changes of existing facilities that result in a reduction 
of energy use per unit of productivity. The ECMs must occur in conjunction with the following: 
 
Building envelope modifications 
 
Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) 
 
Heat generation (including industrial thermal energy systems) 
 
Chilling/cooling systems 
 
Lighting and lighting control 
 
Building mechanical infrastructure 
 
Appliances and industrial processes (including heating and cooling requirements and process 
modification) 
 
Electric motors 
 
Equipment optimization 
The following guidance provides further clarification on energy efficiency activities, approach and 
applicability: 
a. The project proponent must document the useful life of the ECMs and the remaining useful 
life of the existing baseline equipment and ensure that the project unit(s) is not credited 
beyond the useful life of the ECM or remaining useful life of the existing technology in the 
baseline scenario. If capital stock equipment that was originally measured in the baseline for 
a given project crediting period is replaced during a project crediting period, it can only be 
considered additional, and in turn be able to generate GHG credits, if it was retired prior to its 
natural capital stock rotation as indicated in the initial documentation of useful life. If capital 
stock enters the end of its useful life prior to the end of a project crediting period and is 
replaced, any emission reduction attributable to this replacement technology must not be 
considered towards generating credits, and shall lower the facility baseline by a sum equal to 
the difference in emissions between the previous capital stock equipment and the 
replacement capital stock equipment.  
b. By reducing energy consumption, applicable projects will reduce GHG emissions associated 
with the conversion of primary energy sources to secondary forms of energy (e.g., electricity, 
heat, mechanical energy, etc.). 
c. This methodology is also applicable to activities generating GHG emission reductions related 
to improvements in combustion efficiency3. This applies to projects involving switching from 
one energy generation method to a less GHG-intensive energy generation method. In this 
case, this methodology only quantifies emissions reductions from fuel switching that occur 
within the project boundary. Fuel switching associated with large energy suppliers, which 
                                                          
3  There must not be double counting between activities related to improvements in combustion efficiency and any 
energy efficiency activities within the project. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
19 
have emission reductions that exceed the established threshold of this methodology, are not 
intended to be quantified using this protocol. Only small on-site power sources, with emission 
reductions within the threshold limit of this methodology, are applicable for inclusion within 
the methodology. This separation of large offsite generation and the project removes risk of 
double counting. A net emission reduction and efficiency improvement would be achieved by 
such activities so long as a net reduction in overall greenhouse gas emissions per unit of 
productivity is achieved. The production of energy, particularly from fossil energy sources, 
has significant associated GHG emissions (typically combustion-related), including both 
direct and indirect sources. 
d. Biological or chemical components of the operation must not yield any increase in non-
biogenic greenhouse gas emissions compared to the baseline scenario, unless these are 
accounted for under the applicable flexibility mechanisms as indicated by an affirmation from 
the project proponent. 
Waste Diversion  
This methodology is applicable where the project activity is the diversion of waste for other productive 
uses and alternative disposal options. This methodology is only applicable to quantify emission reductions 
associated with methane avoidance. This methodology is not approved for quantifying emission 
reductions associated with landfill gas flaring or electricity/energy production. This methodology is 
applicable to the following activities: 
 
Card board recycling 
 
Organic composting 
 
Aerobic decomposition