5 PROJECT BOUNDARY 
5.1 
Temporal Boundaries 
 Peat depletion time (PDT) 
Drained peat is subject to oxidation and subsidence and areas with peat at t = 0 may lose all 
peat before the end of the crediting period. The time at which all peat has disappeared, or at 
which the peat depth reaches a level where no further oxidation or other losses occur (e.g., at 
the average water table depth), is referred to as the PDT. Projects that do not quantify 
reductions of baseline emissions (i.e., those which limit their accounting to GHG removals in 
biomass and/or soil) need not estimate PDT. 
PDT (tPDT-BSL,i) for a stratum in the baseline scenario limits the period during which the project is 
eligible to claim soil emission reductions from rewetting, and is estimated at the project start 
date for each stratum i as: 
tPDT-BSL,i = Depthpeat,i,t0 / Ratepeatloss-BSL,I  
 
 
 
 
 
 (1) 
Where: 
tPDT-BSL,I 
= PDT in the baseline scenario in stratum i (in years elapsed since the project 
start date); yr 
Depthpeat,i,t0 
= Average organic soil depth above the drainage limit in stratum i at the 
project start date; m 
Ratepeatloss-BSL,i 
= Rate of organic soil loss due to subsidence and fire in the baseline scenario 
in stratum i; a conservative (high) value must be applied that remains 
constant over the time from t = 0 to PDT; m yr-1. 
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
13 
If tPDT-BSL,i falls within the crediting period, subsequent organic carbon loss from remaining 
mineral soil may be estimated as well using the procedure for SDT in Section 5.1.2. 
Organic soil depths, depths of burn scars and subsidence rates must be derived from the data 
sources described in Section Error! Reference source not found.. Water table depth is 
assessed, if relevant, following procedures in Section 9.3.11. 
If tPDT-BSL,i falls within the Crediting Period, subsequent organic carbon loss from remaining 
mineral soil may be estimated as well using the procedure for SDT in Section 5.1.2, below. 
 Soil organic carbon depletion time (SDT) 
Projects that do not quantify reductions of baseline emissions (i.e., those which limit their 
accounting to GHG removals in biomass and/or soil) need not estimate SDT. 
SDT (tSDT-BSL,i) for a stratum in the baseline scenario limits the period during which the project is 
eligible to claim emission reductions from restoration, and is estimated at the project start date 
for each stratum i as follows: 
For strata with eroded soils: 
tSDT-BSL,i = 5 years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
For strata with soils exposed to an aerobic environment through excavation or drainage, use the 
following equation. 
tSDT-BSL,i = CBSL,i,t0 / RateCloss-BSL,i  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Where: 
tSDT-BSL,i   
= SDT in the baseline scenario in stratum i (in years elapsed since the  
 
  
project start date); yr 
CBSL,i,t0   
= Average organic carbon stock in the baseline scenario in mineral soil in  
 
  
stratum i at the project start date; t C ha-1 (see Equation 10) 
RateCloss-BSL,i 
= Rate of soil organic carbon loss due to oxidation in the baseline scenario  
 
  
in stratum i; a conservative (high) value must be applied that remains  
 
  
constant over the time from t = 0 to SDT; t C ha-1 yr-1.  
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 … MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
 
The project proponent must determine the depth (Depthsoil,i,t0 in Equation 12 below) over which 
CBSL,i,t0 is determined. Note that a shallower depth will lead to a shorter, and more conservative, 
SDT. Where SDT is not determined, no reductions of baseline emissions from mineral soil may 
be claimed. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
14 
Extrapolation of RateCloss-BSL,i over the project crediting period must account for the possibility of 
a non-linear decrease of soil organic carbon over time, including the tendency of organic carbon 
concentrations to approach steady-state equilibrium. For this reason, a complete loss of soil 
organic carbon may not occur in mineral soils. This steady-state equilibrium must be 
determined conservatively. 
In case of alternating mineral and organic horizons, RateCloss-BSL,i may be determined for all 
individual horizons. This also applies to cases where an organic surface layer of less than 10 
cm exists or in cases where the soil is classified as organic but its organic matter depletion is 
expected within the project crediting period and oxidation of organic matter in an underlying 
mineral soil may occur within this period. 
SDT is conservatively set to zero for project sites drained more than 20 years prior to the 
project start date. SDT is also conservatively set to zero where significant soil erosion occurs in 
the baseline scenario (significant defined as >5% of RateCloss-BSL,i). 
With respect to the estimation of SDT, the accretion of sediment in the baseline scenario is 
conservatively excluded. 
5.2 
Geographic Boundaries 
 General 
The project proponent must define the geographic boundaries of the project area at the 
beginning of project activities. The project proponent must provide the geographic coordinates 
of lands (including sub-tidal seagrass areas, where relevant) included in the project area to 
facilitate accurate delineation of the project area. Remotely sensed data, published topographic 
maps and data, land administration and tenure records and/or other official documentation 
that facilitates clear delineation of the project area must be used. 
The project activity may contain more than one discrete area of land. Each discrete area of land 
must have a unique geographical identification. 
When describing physical project boundaries, the following information must be provided for 
each discrete area: 
• 
Name of the project area (including compartment numbers, local name (if any)). 
• 
Unique identifier for each discrete parcel of land. 
• 
Map(s) of the area (preferably in digital format). 
• 
The project area must be geo-referenced and provided in digital format in accordance 
with VCS rules. 
• 
Total area. 
• 
Details of land rights holder and user rights. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
15 
 Stratification 
Where the project area at the project start date is not homogeneous, stratification may be 
carried out to improve the accuracy and the precision of carbon stock and GHG flux estimates. 
Where stratification is employed, different stratifications may be required for the baseline and 
project scenarios in order to achieve optimal accuracy of the estimates of net GHG emission 
reductions and removals. 
Strata may be defined based on soil type and depth (including eligibility as assessed below), 
water table depth, vegetation cover and/or vegetation composition, salinity, land type (open 
water, channel, and unvegetated sand or mudflat) or expected changes in these characteristics. 
Strata must be spatially discrete and stratum areas must be known. Areas of individual strata 
must sum to the total project area. Strata must be identified with spatial data (e.g., maps, GIS 
coverage, classified imagery, sampling grids) from which the area can be determined 
accurately. Land use/land cover maps in particular must be ground-truthed and less than 10 
years old, unless it can be demonstrated that the maps are still accurate. Strata must be 
discernible taking into account good practice with respect to accuracy requirements for the 
definition of strata limits and boundaries. The type of spatial data must be indicated and 
justified in the project description. 
The project area may be stratified ex ante, and this stratification may be revised ex post for 
monitoring purposes. Established strata may be merged if reasons for their separate 
establishment are no longer meaningful, or have proven irrelevant to key variables for 
estimating net GHG emission reductions and removals. Baseline stratification must remain 
fixed until a reassessment of the baseline scenario occurs. Stratification in the project scenario 
must be reviewed at each monitoring event prior to verification and revised if necessary. 
The sub-sections below specify further requirements and guidance with respect to stratification 
in certain scenarios.  
Areas with organic soil 
The project proponent must use VCS module VMD0016 Methods for Stratification of the Project 
Areas in order to stratify project areas that include organic soil. 
Seagrass meadows 
Given the tendency of seagrasses to respond differently under different light and depth 
regimes, the project proponent may differentiate between seagrass meadow sections that 
occur at different depths given discrete, or relatively abrupt, bathymetric and substrate 
changes. 
For seagrass meadow restoration projects in areas with existing seagrass meadows, the project 
proponent must quantify the percentage of meadow expansion that can be attributed to the 
restoration effort but that is not the result of direct planting or seeding. Existing meadows 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
16 
(unless smaller in area than 5% of the total project area) must be excluded from the calculation 
of project emissions, even in cases where the restored meadow enhances carbon 
sequestration rates in existing meadows. 
New seagrass meadows that result from natural expansion must be contiguous with restored 
meadow plots in order to be included in project accounting, unless the project proponent 
demonstrates that non-contiguous meadow patches originated from restored meadow seeds. 
This may be performed via genetic testing or estimated as a percentage of new meadow in non-
contiguous plots and observed no less than four years after the project start date. 3 This 
percentage must not exceed the proportion of restored meadow area relative to the total extent 
of seagrass meadow areal, and the project proponent must demonstrate the feasibility of 
current-borne seed dispersal from the restored meadow. In cases where a restored meadow 
coalesces with an existing meadow(s), the project proponent must delineate the line at which 
the two meadows are joined. The project proponent may use either aerial observations showing 
meadow extent or direct field observations. 
Native ecosystems 
In order to claim emission removals from ARR or WRC activities, the project proponent must 
provide evidence in the project description that the project area was not cleared of native 
ecosystems to create GHG credits. Such proof is not required where such clearing took place 
prior to the 10-year period prior to the project start date. Areas that do not meet this 
requirement must be excluded from the project area. 
Stratification of vegetation cover for adoption of the default SOC accumulation rate 
The default factor for SOC accumulation rate may only be applied to non-seagrass tidal wetland 
systems with a crown or vegetation cover of at least 15%, with a linearly discounted factor for 
areas with a crown or vegetation cover of less than 50% (see Sections 8.1.4.2.3 and 8.2.4.2.1). 
For the baseline scenario, crown or vegetation covers must be based on a time series of 
vegetation composition. For the project scenario, crown or vegetation cover mapping must be 
performed according to established methods in scientific literature. 
Stratification of salinity for the accounting of CH4 
Tidal wetlands may be stratified according to salinity for the purpose of estimating CH4 
emissions. Threshold values of salinity for mapping salinity strata are specified in Section 
8.1.4.5.4. 
Areas with unrestricted tidal exchange will maintain salinity levels similar to the tidal water 
source, while those with infrequent tidal flooding will not (in which case the use of channel 
water salinity levels is not reliable). For such areas it is therefore recommended to stratify 
according to the frequency of tidal exchange. 
 
3 McGlathery et al. (2012) 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
17 
Procedures for the measurement of salinity levels are specified in Section 9.3.8. 
Stratification of water bodies lacking tidal exchange 
The area of ponds, ditches or similar bodies of water within the project area must be measured 
and treated as separate strata when they do not have surface tidal water exchange. CH4 
emissions from these features may be excluded from GHG accounting if the area of these 
features does not increase in the project scenario. 
 
Sea level rise 
When defining geographic project boundaries and strata, the project proponent must consider 
expected relative sea level rise and the potential for expanding the project area landward to 
account for wetland migration, inundation and erosion.  
For both the baseline and project scenarios, the project proponent must provide a projection of 
relative sea level rise within the project area based on IPCC regional forecasts or peer-reviewed 
literature applicable to the region. In addition, the project proponent may also utilize expert 
judgment4. Global average sea level rise scenarios are not suitable for determining the changes 
in wetlands boundaries. Therefore, if used, IPCC most-likely global sea level rise scenarios must 
be appropriately downscaled to regional conditions that include vertical land movements, such 
as subsidence. 
Whether degradation occurs in the baseline scenario or restoration occurs in the project 
scenario, the assessment of potential wetland migration, inundation and erosion with respect 
to projected sea level rise must account for topographical slope, land use and management, 
sediment supply and tidal range. The assessment may use published data from the project 
area, expert judgment or both. Please note that the VCS AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool 
must be used to assess the risk of erosion and inundation caused by sea level rise on carbon 
stocks in the project scenario. 
When assessing the potential for tidal wetlands to migrate horizontally, one must consider the 
topography of the adjacent land and any migration barriers that may exist. In general, and on 
coastlines where wetland migration is unimpaired by infrastructure, concave-up slopes may 
cause ‘coastal squeeze’, while straight or convex-up gradients are more likely to provide the 
space required for lateral movement. 
The potential for tidal wetlands to rise vertically with sea level rise is sensitive to suspended 
sediment loads in the system. A sediment load of >300 mg/l has been found to balance high-
end IPCC scenarios for sea level rise (Orr et al. 2003, Stralsburg et al. 2011). French (2006) 
and Morris et al. (2012) suggest that the findings of Orr et al. 2003 from the San Francisco 
Bay could be used elsewhere5. French (2006) indicates that at 250 mg/l, sea level rise of 15 
 
4 Requirements for expert judgment are provided in Section 9.3.3. 
5 Orr et al. 2003, Stralberg et al. 2011 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
18 
mm is balanced at a tidal range of 1 m or greater. Therefore, for marshes with a tidal range 
greater than 1 m, the project proponent may use >300 mg/l as a sediment load threshold 
above which wetlands are not predicted to be submerged. The project proponent may use lower 
threshold values for tidal range and sediment load where justified. The vulnerability of tidal 
wetlands to sea level rise and conversion to open water is also related to tidal range. In general, 
the most vulnerable tidal wetlands are those in areas with a small tidal range, those with 
elevations low in the tidal frame and those in locations with low suspended sediment loads. 
The VCS AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool must be used to assess the risk of erosion and 
inundation caused by sea level rise on carbon stocks in the project scenario. In the baseline 
scenario, the project proponent may conservatively assume that part of the project area 
submerges, with cessation of GHG removal from the atmosphere as a consequence. If the 
project is not claiming emissions due to erosion in the baseline scenario, the project proponent 
may conservatively assume that part of the project area erodes. For areas that submerge 
without erosion, the loss of SOC may be assumed to be insignificant in both the baseline and 
project scenarios. 
The projection of wetland boundaries within the project area must be presented in maps 
delineating these boundaries from the project start date until the end of the project crediting 
period, at intervals appropriate to the rate of change due to sea level rise, and at t = 100. 
Procedures for estimating the risk of project area submergence due to relative sea level rise are 
provided in the VCS AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool. 
Estimation of area of eroded strata 
Tidal wetlands may be subject to two forms of erosion: a) Seaward edges of wetlands are 
subject to migration due to changes in local sea level, regional sediment delivery, and impacts 
of human actions (e.g., nearby excavation of shipping channels); b) In sheltered settings, away 
from open shores, wetlands may also erode internally through channel enlargement if sediment 
supply for wetland accretion is insufficient to keep pace with sea-level rise. 
Projections of future erosion must take into account scaling of wetland retreat against 
projections of accelerated sea-level rise, any modification to sediment supply and human 
action. 
Channel densities (surface area of channel per surface area of wetland) greater than 20% 
and/or changes in wetland vegetation consistent with increased duration or depth of flooding is 
an indication that the wetland may not be keeping pace with sea level. Similarly, a decline in 
surface elevation relative to a datum of mean high water surface spring elevation in the interior 
of the tidal wetland is an indication of wetland sensitivity to sediment supply under conditions 
of sea-level rise. Sites with an annual average suspended sediment load in flooding waters of 
>300 mg/l may be considered resilient to sea-level rise in terms of surface accretion. The 
project proponent should take into account these indicators of wetland potential sensitivity to 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
19 
sea-level rise when considering whether to extend the eroded area strata to include marsh 
interior. 
Because such projections are driven by conditions specific to individual project settings, expert 
knowledge from an experienced geomorphologist / coastal engineer must be utilized for 
complex projects. 
 Ineligible wetland areas  
For projects quantifying CO2 emission reductions, project areas which do not achieve a 
significant difference (≥ 5%) in cumulative carbon loss over a period of 100 years beyond the 
project start date are not eligible for crediting based on the reduction of baseline emissions, 
and these areas must be mapped. 
The maximum quantity of GHG emission reductions which may be claimed from the soil carbon 
pool is limited to the difference between the remaining soil organic carbon stock in the project 
and baseline scenarios after 100 years (total stock approach), or the difference in cumulative 
soil organic carbon loss in both scenarios over a period of 100 years since the project start 
date (stock loss approach). The project proponent must calculate this maximum quantity ex 
ante using conservative parameters and following one of the options below. 
1. Total stock approach 
The difference between soil organic carbon stock in the project scenario and baseline scenario 
at t = 100 is estimated as: 
𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡100 = ∑
(𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖× 𝐴𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡100)
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=0
−∑
(𝐶𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡100 × 𝐴𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡100)
𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑖=0
 
 
(3) 
CWPS,i,t100 requires no adjustment for leakage since the applicability conditions of this 
methodology are structured to ensure leakage emissions do not occur, as explained in Section 
8.3. 
The difference between organic carbon stock in the project scenario and baseline scenario at 
t  = 100 (CWPS-BSL,t100) is significant if: 
∑
(𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡100 × 𝐴𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡00)
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=0
≥1.05 × ∑
(𝐶𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡100 × 𝐴𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡100)
𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑖=0
      
 
(4) 
For organic soil: 
CWPS,i,t100 = Depthpeat-WPS,i,t100 × VC × 10  
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
CBSL,i,t100 = Depthpeat-BSL,i,t100 × VC × 10  
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡,100 = 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑡,0 −∑
𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡
𝑡=100
𝑡=1
 
 
 
(8) 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
20 
𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡,100 = 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑡,0 −∑
𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡
𝑡=100
𝑡=1
 
 
 
(9) 
For mineral soil: 
𝐶𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡100 = 𝐶𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡0 −∑
𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡
𝑡=100
𝑡=1
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1.0) 
𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡100 = 𝐶𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡0 −∑
𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡
𝑡=100
𝑡=1
  
 
 
 
 
(11) 
CBSL,i,t0 = Depthsoil,i,t0 × VC × 10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 
 
Where a conservative constant rate of subsidence or carbon loss is applied, a possible negative 
outcome must be substituted by zero. 
The carbon content of organic or mineral soil may be taken from measurements within the 
project area, or from literature involving the project area or similar areas. 
 
2. Stock loss approach 
The project proponent may also calculate the maximum quantity based on cumulative soil 
organic carbon loss up to t = 100 as follows: 
𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡,100 = ∑
(𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡100
𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑖=1
× 𝐴𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖) −∑
(𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡,100 
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=1
× 𝐴𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖) 
(13) 
For organic soil: 
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡,100 = 10 × ∑
(𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡
100
𝑖=1
× 𝑉𝐶) 
 
 
 
 
(14) 
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑡,100 = 10 × ∑
(𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡
100
𝑖=1
× 𝑉𝐶) 
 
 
 
 
(15) 
For mineral soil: 
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡,100 = 10 × ∑
(𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖,𝑡
100
𝑖=1
× 𝑉𝐶) 
 
 
 
 
(16) 
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑡,100 = 10 × ∑
(𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠−𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑖,𝑡
100
𝑖=1
× 𝑉𝐶) 
 
 
 
 
(17) 
 
Where: 
CWPS-BSL,t100 
= Difference between soil organic carbon stock in the project scenario and  
 
 
baseline scenario at t = 100; t C ha-1 
CWPS,i,t100 
= Soil organic carbon stock in the project scenario in stratum i at t = 100 ; t  
 
 
C ha-1 
CBSL,i,t100 
= Soil organic carbon stock in the baseline scenario in stratum i at t = 100; t C 
ha-1 
AWPS,i,t100 
= Area of project stratum i at t = 100; ha 
ABSL,i,t100 
= Area of baseline stratum i at t = 100; ha 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
21 
Depthpeat-WPS,i,t100 = Average organic soil depth in the project scenario in stratum i at t = 100; m 
Depthpeat-BSL,i,t100 = Average organic soil depth in the baseline scenario in stratum i at t = 100; m 
VC 
 
= Volumetric organic carbon content in organic or mineral soil; kg C m-3 
Depthpeat,i,t0 
= Average organic soil depth above the drainage limit in stratum i at the project 
start date; m 
Ratepeatloss-BSL,i,t 
= Rate of organic soil loss due to subsidence and fire in the baseline scenario 
in stratum i in year t; m yr-1.  
Ratepeatloss,WPS,i,t 
= Rate of organic soil loss due to subsidence in the project scenario in stratum 
i in year t; m yr-1.  
CBSL,i,t0  
= Soil organic carbon stock in the baseline scenario in mineral soil in stratum i 
at the project start date; t C ha-1 
RateCloss-BSL,i,t 
= Rate of organic carbon loss in mineral soil due to oxidation in the baseline 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 yr-1.  
RateCloss,WPS,i,t 
= Rate of organic carbon loss in mineral soil due to oxidation in the project 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 yr-1. This value is conservatively set to 
zero as loss rates are likely to be negative. This parameter must be reassessed 
when the baseline is reassessed.  
Depthsoil,i,t0 
= Mineral soil depth in stratum i at the project start date (as in Equation 12); m 
Closs-BSL,i,t100 
Cumulative soil organic carbon loss in the baseline scenario in stratum i at  
 
 
t = 100; t C ha-1 
Closs-WPS,i,t100 
= Cumulative soil organic carbon loss in the project scenario in stratum i at  
 
 
t = 100; t C ha-1 
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t100 
 
= 100 years after the project start date 
 Buffer zones 
Where established, buffer zones must be mapped in accordance with the VCS rules. 
5.3 
Carbon Pools 
The carbon pools included in and excluded from the project boundary are shown in Table 1 
below. 
Carbon pools may be deemed de minimis and do not need to be accounted for if together the 
omitted decrease in carbon stocks or increase in GHG emissions (Table 2) amounts to less than 
5% of the total GHG benefit generated by the project. Peer reviewed literature or the CDM tool 
AR-Tool04 Tool for testing significance of GHG emissions in A/R CDM project activities may be 
used to determine whether decreases in carbon pools are de minimis. 
Table 1: Selection and justification of carbon pools 
Carbon Pool 
Included? 
Justification/Explanation 
Aboveground tree biomass 
Yes 
Major carbon pool may significantly increase 
or decrease in both the baseline and project 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
22 
scenarios, in the case of establishment or 
presence of tree vegetation. 
Aboveground tree biomass in the baseline 
scenario must be included. 
Aboveground tree biomass in the project 
scenario may be included or conservatively 
omitted. 
Aboveground non-tree 
biomass 
Yes 
Carbon stock in this pool may increase in the 
baseline scenario and may increase or 
decrease in the project scenario. 
Below-ground biomass 
Yes 
Major carbon pool may significantly increase in 
the baseline, or decrease in the project, or 
both, in case of presence of tree vegetation. 
Below-ground biomass in the baseline 
scenario must be included. 
Below-ground biomass in the project scenario 
may be included or conservatively omitted. 
Litter 
Yes 
This pool is optional for WRC methodologies. 
Litter is only included indirectly in association 
with the quantification of herbal mass. 
Dead wood 
Yes 
This pool is optional for WRC methodologies. 
Soil 
Yes 
The soil organic carbon stock may increase 
due to the implementation of the project 
activity. 
Wood products 
Yes 
Carbon stock in this pool may increase in the 
project scenario. 
 
5.4 
Sources of Greenhouse Gases 
The greenhouse gases included in or excluded from the project boundary are shown in Table 2 
below. 
GHG sources may be deemed de minimis and do not have to be accounted for if together the 
omitted decrease in carbon stocks (Table 1) or increase in GHG emissions amounts to less than 
5% of the total GHG benefit generated by the project. Peer-reviewed literature or the CDM tool 
AR-Tool04 Tool for testing significance of GHG emissions in A/R CDM project activities may be 
used to determine whether increases in emissions are de minimis. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
23 
Table 2: GHG Sources Included In or Excluded From the Project Boundary 
Source 
Gas 
Included? 
Justification/Explanation 
Baseline 
The production of 
methane by microbes 
CH4 
Yes 
May be conservatively excluded in the 
baseline scenario. 
Denitrification/nitrification 
N2O 
Yes 
May be conservatively excluded in the 
baseline scenario. 
Burning of biomass and 
organic soil 
CO2 
Yes 
Implicitly included in the Fire 
Reduction Premium approach. 
CH4 
Yes 
Implicitly included in the Fire 
Reduction Premium approach. 
N2O 
Yes 
Implicitly included in the Fire 
Reduction Premium approach. 
Fossil fuel use 
CO2 
Yes 
May be conservatively excluded in the 
baseline scenario. 
CH4 
No 
Conservatively excluded in the 
baseline scenario. 
N2O 
No 
Conservatively excluded in the 
baseline scenario. 
Project 
The production of 
methane by microbes 
CH4 
Yes 
Potential major source of emissions in 
the project in low salinity and 
freshwater areas.  
Denitrification/nitrification 
N2O 
Yes 
May increase as a result of the project 
activity.  
Burning of biomass 
CO2 
Yes 
CO2 is addressed in carbon stock 
change procedures. 
CH4 
Yes 
Potential major source of fire 
emissions. 
N2O 
Yes 
Potential major source of fire 
emissions. 
Fossil fuel use 
CO2 
Yes/No 
Potential major source of emissions in 
an RWE project scenario where 
movement of soil material with 
machines and trucks occurs. 
Not included in a project scenario 
where planting or sowing occurs 
without soil movement (e.g., mangrove 
planting). 
CH4 
No 
Not a significant source of emissions 
in project fuel use. 
N2O 
No 
Not a significant source of emissions 
in project fuel use. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
24