2 
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
This methodology facilitates the quantification of the net GHG benefits of Improved Forest Management 
projects in natural Evergreen Tropical Rainforests that achieve carbon benefits in one of, or a 
combination of, two activities: 
• 
Avoiding emissions from re-logging of already logged-over forest; and, 
• 
Rehabilitation of previously logged-over forest by cutting climbers and vines, or liberation 
thinning, or enrichment planting, or a combination of these activities.  
The baseline scenario therefore consists of a logged-over natural Evergreen Tropical Rainforest, 
normally with no or insignificant regrowth, that may or may not be relogged. To determine the emissions 
in the baseline, the following components are quantified: volume of timber removed during relogging 
(expanded to include emissions from total associated biomass losses); the amount of dead wood left 
after relogging; the carbon stored in harvested wood products; if absence of regrowth cannot be 
substantiated, regrowth of the residual stand; and, emissions associated with the establishment of 
infrastructure and fuel consumption. 
Because baselines often become counter factual once the project gets implemented, this methodology 
facilitates the quantification of the above components in two ways: 
• 
On the basis of a-spatial data in a pre-relogging situation in the project area, in combination 
with, for instance, logging information in a management plan; or, 
• 
By the determination of the carbon stock components after relogging has occurred in a 
reference area for which similarity to the project area is demonstrated.  
The relationship between the two baseline options and the project area is then established by analyzing 
the logging rates in the various strata in the baseline, determining the same strata in the project area, 
and applying the stratum-specific logging rates to the strata in the project area. 
The methodology allows for the use of both approaches together, if either of the two cannot be 
supported with a complete set of information, with the following examples: (1) While obtaining spatially 
explicit post-relogging carbon stock data from a reference area through direct measurements, spatially 
explicit pre-relogging data based on direct measurements may be lacking. Once the similarity of the 
reference area and the project area has been ensured, pre-relogging carbon stock data may also be 
obtained from the project area. (2) If spatially explicit pre-relogging carbon stock data based on direct 
measurements is lacking, similarity between the reference area and the project area may be justified by 
reconstructing pre-relogging carbon stocks from the post-relogging data of the reference area and 
VM0005, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 4 
 
harvesting volumes from management files of the forest management unit, and comparing these with 
pre-relogging carbon stock data from the project area. The validity of reconstructed pre-relogging 
carbon stocks may be supported by other inventory data of the reference area (eg, inventories of 
commercial timber prior to relogging), the supporting data being subject to the scrutiny of the validator. 
(3) While using a-spatial data for assessing baseline carbon stock changes, carbon stocks in dead 
wood may be derived from a reference area. 
While ensuring conservative results for net GHG project benefits, these options support the 
implementation of FM project activities in areas where data collection has not been organized in such a 
way that it facilitates compliance a priori with international carbon standards, which is very often the 
case. 
The with-project scenario constitutes the avoidance of relogging, or rehabilitation of previously logged-
over forest, or both. Rehabilitation, if any, is achieved by cutting climbers and vines, or liberation 
thinning, or enrichment planting, or a combination of these activities. To determine the emissions and 
removals in the with-project scenario, the following components are quantified: carbon stocks before 
the intervention; increases in carbon stocks over time; and emissions due to site preparation and 
project implementation. 
An additional feature of this methodology is the determination of the regrowth of the residual forest in 
both the baseline and the with-project scenario. If regrowth occurs in the baseline scenario this is 
assumed to be small compared to regrowth in the with-project scenario. 
The removal of herbaceous vegetation (including climbers and vines) is deemed an insignificant 
emissions source and therefore is not accounted for in the with-project scenario. 
The methodology also provides for the quantification of leakage. 
Finally, the methodology provides for the determination of the project’s net GHG benefits and the 
resulting Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) that are generated. The methodology details the steps 
necessary to come to the final calculation of the project’s net GHG benefits, represented by ∆CIFM.  
∆CIFM = ∆CBSL – ∆CWPS – ∆CLK  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
Where: 
Parameter 
Description 
∆CIFM 
Total net GHG emission reductions from the IFM project activity 
∆CBSL 
Sum of the carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions 
under the baseline scenario 
∆CWPS 
Sum of the carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions 
under the with-project scenario 
VM0005, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 5 
 
∆CLK 
Sum of the carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions 
due to leakage 
 
Thus, the basis of the methodology is the estimation of total carbon benefits from the IFM project 
activity as the result of the total carbon loss in the baseline scenario (∆CBSL) avoided due to the project 
activity and the net removals through the enhancement of forest growth due to liberation thinning and 
enrichment planting (∆CWPS), minus any leakage (∆CLK) that might occur. 
 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method