4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
Projects must fall within the VCS AFOLU project category “IFM: Logged to Protected Forest” as 
defined in the most recent version VCS Standard and associated VCS Program documents.  
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
• 
Forest management in the baseline scenario is planned selective logging. 
• 
Planned selective logging must be estimated using forest inventory methods that 
determine allowable offtake as volume of timber (m3 ha-1). 
• 
Boundaries of the forest land are clearly defined and documented. 
• 
All applicability conditions of VCS and CDM tools used in conjunction with this 
methodology are met 
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
• 
The project area includes planted forests.  
• 
Under the project scenario, forest use in the project area includes commercial timber 
harvest or activities that cause forest degradation. 
• 
The baseline scenario includes conversion to managed plantations. 
• 
The project occurs in wetlands or peatlands.  
• 
The project occurs in a location where VM0045 is currently applicable.  
4.1 
Eligibility 
Legal Right to Harvest 
The legal right to harvest must pre-exist the implementation of the project. 
The legal right to harvest must be issued by a relevant government body, define a legal 
allocation of rights to a forest timber resource, and includes a plan for forest management that 
contains a definition of the spatial extent of the forest, the volume of the timber resource to be 
extracted and a description of harvesting practices. 
Rights to forest management must be demonstrated by documentary proof of legal 
permissibility for timber harvest, intent to harvest and a description of the timber resource. This 
proof must be issued by the relevant (governmental) regulatory body that has designated, 
sanctioned or approved the project area (or areas) for forest management. 
Intent to Harvest 
The project proponent must demonstrate intent to harvest through the following forms of 
evidence originating prior to the date of all evidence in pursuit of carbon finance/consideration 
of IFM. Projects must provide either: 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
10 
 
• 
Documented evidence demonstrating that: 
o 
The project site is representative of other forestlands harvested in the country within 
the past two years; and, 
o 
The project site is within commercially viable distance to existing transport networks 
and a port for timber export or a mill for timber processing; or, 
• 
A valid and verifiable government-approved timber management plan for harvesting the 
project area.