7 ADDITIONALITY 
7.1 
Destruction of CFC or HCFC Refrigerant 
This methodology uses an activity method to demonstrate additionality for the destruction of 
CFC or HCFC refrigerant. 
 
4 Step 2b: Demonstrate That Barriers Would Prevent Project Activity Implementation 
Step 2d: Demonstrate That Carbon Credit Revenues are Decisive in Overcoming Barriers 
VM0016, v2.0 
16 
Step 1: Regulatory Surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent version of the VCS 
Standard.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to Step 2. Otherwise, 
the project activity is not additional. 
Step 2: Positive List 
Where the project proponent demonstrates that the project meets all applicability conditions of 
this methodology and VMD0048 Activity Method for the Determination of Additionality for 
Recovered and Stockpiled ODS Refrigerants, the project is additional. 
7.2 
Destruction of Other ODS or HFC Refrigerant, Blowing Agent, Fire 
Suppression Agent, and Propellant 
This methodology uses a project method to demonstrate additionality for the destruction of 
other ODS or HFC refrigerant, blowing agent, fire suppression agent, and propellant where the 
activity method is not applicable.   
Step 1: Regulatory Surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements set out in the most recent versions of the VCS Standard.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to Step 2. Otherwise, 
the project activity is not additional. 
Step 2: Barrier analysis and/or investment analysis 
Project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of the most recent version of 
VT0008 Additionality Assessment to conduct either a barrier analysis or an investment 
analysis. For the investment analysis, the option “investment comparison analysis” must be 
applied. Project proponents may choose to apply both analyses to further strengthen the 
additionality demonstration. 
Where the project proponent demonstrates that all conditions of either the barrier analysis 
and/or the investment analysis per VT0008 are met, proceed to Step 3. Otherwise, the project 
activity is not additional. 
VM0016, v2.0 
17 
Step 3: Common practice analysis 
Project proponents must conduct a common practice analysis in accordance with “Step 4c: 
Common Practice Analysis for Measures Not Listed in Step 4a” of the most recent version of 
VT0008. 
Where the project proponent demonstrates that the project is not considered common practice, 
the project is additional. Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.