7 ADDITIONALITY 
This methodology uses the project method to assess additionality using the following steps. A 
justification for this approach is provided in Appendix 1.  
7.1 
Step 1: Regulatory Surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus per the rules and requirements set 
out in the most recent version of the VCS Methodology Requirements. 
Project proponents must consider the laws, statutes, regulatory frameworks, and policies 
applicable in the jurisdiction of the capture site(s). 
7.2 
Step 2: Implementation Barrier 
Project proponents must demonstrate that they face an investment barrier (i.e., capital or 
investment return constraints) that would prevent the project from being implemented without 
carbon credit revenues. 
To analyze the investment barrier, project proponents must conduct an investment analysis per 
Step 2 in the most recent version of CDM TOOL01 Tool for the Demonstration and Assessment 
of Additionality following Option III “Apply the benchmark analysis” and using CDM TOOL27 
Investment Analysis.  
The following also applies to the investment analysis: 
1) The assessment must be from the perspective of the capture activity. Transport and 
storage activities must be treated as costs to the capture activity. This applies to both:  
a) Projects with diverse operatorships where costs may be incurred as real fees from 
transport and storage site operators; and  
b) Vertically integrated projects, where the project proponent must internally account 
for capital and operating costs of the transport and storage site(s).   
2) Revenues (e.g., from subsidies paid by governments) from capture, transport (where 
applicable), and storage activities must be incorporated into the investment analysis 
(e.g., a fee per tonne of CO2 transported and/or stored), regardless of the 
owner/operator of the transport facilities and storage site(s). This does not apply to 
revenues arising from payments between capture, transport, and storage services as 
part of the project activities.  
3) Where shared infrastructure is relevant to the economics of a project, costs or revenues 
must reflect the estimated (or contracted, where available) usage rate of transport and 
storage by each capture activity (e.g., where a capture activity uses 10% of the 
transport and storage capacity, the costs must be prorated and not reflect the cost of 
the entire transport and storage capacity).  
 
VM0049, v1.0 
 
13 
4) Where multiple capture activities exist, the investment analysis must consider all 
capture activities in the project when demonstrating the existence of an investment 
barrier.  
5) Where a project has undersubscribed transportation and/or storage usage at the time 
of the investment analysis, the expected usage rate, fee structure, and return on 
investment must be used as inputs.  
6) Revenue and indirect financial benefits (e.g., savings) for the CO2 source facilities must 
be accounted for, regardless of whether the operators of source facilities and capture 
facilities are the same entity. Examples include: 
a) Savings from avoiding or reducing the payment of carbon tax or other fines/levies; 
b) Revenue generation based on the forecasted value of emissions allowances 
granted to the project activity for periods when Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) are 
not issued (VCUs are not issued for the reductions and removals benefit where 
emissions allowances are also granted); and 
c) Savings from avoiding or reducing costs for (flue) gas cleaning. 
7) Payments from the capture facilities to the source facilities for the CO2 captured are not 
considered costs in the investment analysis. 
8) Funding from governments or other institutions in the form of grants, tax credits, 
concessional loans, guarantees, contracts for difference, negative emission payments, 
or other subsidies (all herein referred to as public support mechanisms) must be 
reflected as revenues, savings, or in the determination of the benchmark as applicable, 
regardless of whether the project is vertically integrated or has diverse ownership. 
However, public support mechanisms should not be considered in the financial 
additionality analysis where: 
a) The funder requires the project proponent to try to generate and sell carbon 
credits as a condition for the public support mechanism; and 
b) The carbon credit revenue (in whole or part) displaces funds from the public 
support mechanism that would have otherwise been provided to the project.  
9) In addition to the requirements of paragraph 20 (Tool01), the alternatives to the project 
activity used for comparison must also be mutually exclusive. 
10) Option c in paragraph 38 (Tool01) (i.e. – a company internal benchmark) cannot be 
used  
11) The assumptions, data, and conclusions of the investment analysis referred to 
paragraphs 40 – 42 (Tool01), must be consistent with information presented to the 
company’s decision-making management and investors/lenders.  
 
VM0049, v1.0 
 
14 
12) In addition to the requirements of paragraph 42 (Tool01), the investment analysis must 
also demonstrate that carbon revenues are the deciding factor in increasing the overall 
economic performance of the proposed activity to a level at or above the benchmark. 
7.2.1 Contingencies for Operating and Maintenance Costs  
Contingency costs account for costs that cannot be anticipated/forecasted when applying the 
investment analysis tool. Estimated contingency costs are expressed as a percentage of the 
operating and maintenance costs used in the investment analysis completed for a comparable 
prior activity. One of the following options must be used to determine contingency costs in the 
context of operating and maintenance costs of the project activity:  
Option 1: Reference previously estimated contingency costs from other activities undertaken by 
the project proponent, with a comparable level of technological maturity and risk to the project 
activity at the time of the final investment decision.  
Option 2: Reference actual historical contingency costs incurred when the project proponent 
implemented other activities using technologies with similar levels of maturity and risk to the 
project activity. The contingency costs are calculated by subtracting the actual operating and 
maintenance costs incurred over a given period from the estimated operating and maintenance 
costs for the same period. The estimated operating and maintenance costs must be obtained 
from background work such as feasibility studies to inform investment decisions. 
Option 3: Use other approaches that have been applied in a relevant industrial sector (i.e., 
related to the applicable source facilities) to determine contingency costs, with a maximum 
value of 15% for this option.  
7.3 
Step 3: Common Practice 
The project activity must not be common practice, determined for each capture activity 
included or added to the project as follows: 
1) The project type must not be common practice in the respective sector and country.  
• 
Common practice is defined as the project activity implemented in more than 20% of 
comparable source facilities in the sector and country.  
• 
Similar project activities under validation, submitted for registration, or registered 
under any GHG crediting program may be excluded from the common practice 
analysis. 
• 
The “sector” refers to the source facility sector (e.g., fossil fuel or geothermal-based 
power and heat generation, industrial processes, oil and gas production and 
processing, bioethanol production, biomass power and heat).  
• 
Where a project includes multiple source facilities representing different sectors, each 
source facility requires a separate common practice assessment.  
 
VM0049, v1.0 
 
15 
• 
Where different types of capture facilities are included in the project, a common 
practice assessment is required for each.  
• 
DAC is not considered common practice by default, as there is no source facility.  
2) Where similar activities exist, the project proponent must identify barriers faced compared 
with existing projects to underpin the risks, costs, and/or limitations to regular 
advancement of the project activity, to demonstrate that this is not common practice for the 
project activity. 
Projects that demonstrate regulatory surplus, an investment barrier, and are not common 
practice are deemed additional.