9  
REFERENCES 
Chambers, J. Q., N. Higuchi, J. P. Schimel, L. V. Ferreira, and J. M. Melack. 2000. 
Decomposition and carbon cycling of dead trees in tropical forests of the central Amazon. 
Oecologia 122:380–388. 
IPCC. 2006. IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Chapter 4 AFOLU 
(Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land-use). Prepared by the National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories Programme. IGES, Japan. Available at: http://www.ipcc-
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/vol4.html  
Olson, D. M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E. D., Burgess, N. D., Powell, G. V. N., 
Underwood, E. C., D'Amico, J. A., Itoua, I., Strand, H. E., Morrison, J. C., Loucks, C. J., Allnutt, T. 
F., Ricketts, T. H., Kura, Y., Lamoreux, J. F., Wettengel, W. W., Hedao, P., Kassem, K. R. 2001. 
Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: a new map of life on Earth. Bioscience 51(11):933-938. 
 
 
VM0035, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
27 
 
APPENDIX 1: REGION-SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE METHOD REQUIREMENTS 
Performance method modules may be developed for various geographies. General requirements for 
crediting and additionality benchmarks, and proxy emission reduction relationships, include: 
1) The performance method must clearly specify the logging landscape and timeframe within which 
the values/relationships are applicable (ie, the sample population4). The logging landscape must 
be defined by broad parameters of consistent forest structure and composition (eg, the WWF 
Forested Ecoregions (Olson et al. 2001)). 
2) The performance method must define additionality and crediting baselines in terms of impact 
parameters. Impact parameters must cover the following three sources of logging emissions: 
felling, skidding and hauling. One or more impact parameters may be identified for each of the 
three emissions source categories. When more than one impact parameter is identified for an 
emission source category, they must be measures of distinct (non-overlapping) components of 
that emissions source category.  
3) The performance method must relate emission reductions to impact parameters and quantify and 
discount uncertainty in the dependent variable (ie, emission reductions). Emission reductions are 
calculated from (baseline) emissions associated with the crediting baseline value. Relationships 
between impact parameters and emission reductions must be developed for above and 
belowground tree biomass for each emission category (logging, felling and hauling) and 
expressed in units of tCO2e/ha. 
4) The performance method must specify monitoring procedures for all defined impact parameters. 
An example of the derivation of applicable benchmarks and proxy relationships is provided in VMD0047 
Performance Method for Reduced Impact Logging (RIL-C) in East and North Kalimantan. 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
4  Note that conservative bias is allowed in sampling (ie, skewed toward logging operations allowing access to 
researchers). 
VM0035, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scope 14