3 
DEFINITIONS 
Boreal Forest - as per FAO ecological zone definitions and mapping (FAO, 2001):  “The Boreal, or subarctic, 
domain is found only in the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere between 50-55 to 65-70 degrees. It has at 
least one and up to 4 month with an average temperature above 10oC. Another feature is the large annual range of 
temperature. Rainfall is low, generally below 500 mm. The northern boundary, approximately the isotherm of 10oC 
for the warmest month (usually July), coincides rather well with the poleward limit of tree growth.” 
Clear cut - Harvest removal of >90% of merchantable trees within a defined area   
De minimis – carbon emissions deemed to be insignificant or immaterial to the total GHG calculations.  Unless 
otherwise specified, de minimis refers to activities resulting in <5% change in the total project GHG emission 
reductions.  See (CDM, 2007a) for further details.  
Logging slash - Dead wood residues (including foliage) left on the forest floor after timber removal  
Right of Use – As defined in the most recent version of the VCS Standard.    
Temperate Forest – as per FAO ecological zone definitions and mapping (FAO, 2001): “The temperate domain 
occupies a medial position within the middle latitudes – usually between the subtropical domain equator-wards and 
the boreal domain pole-wards. The boundaries with the subtropical - and boreal domain are 8 months and 4 
months, respectively, with average temperatures of 10°C or above. Its main distribution is in the northern 
hemisphere”. 
Timber Harvest Land Base (THLB) – a sub-set of the project area land base subject to timber harvesting, 
including spatially located areas or reasonable volume-based proxies within the project boundaries which are 
currently considered biologically and economically feasible for timber harvesting as per typical regional logging 
practices relevant to the project site.  Removals from the THLB may include, but are not limited to:  non-forest 
areas; non-commercial forest types; physically inoperable or inaccessible areas due to terrain, soils, etc.; current 
and future roads and other non-forest clearings; legally required or voluntary buffers and protected areas (i.e. 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
5 
riparian zones, wildlife areas, sensitive sites, etc.), long run uneconomical stands, and other areas which are not 
eligible for harvesting under typical or common practices determined in the baseline and project scenarios.  
Examples of determining THLB can be found within British Columbia Timber Supply Analysis documentation at 
http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hts/tsas.htm in Timber Supply Area (TSA) Analysis Reports (i.e. pg. 10, 
http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hts/tsa/tsa13/tsr2/analysis.pdf); however, projects must use methods typical of local forest 
estate modeling and timber supply analyses.  Note that the THLB is a primary stratification which identifies areas 
eligible for harvesting activities; all project requirements apply to the entire project area.   
Tree - A perennial woody plant with a diameter at breast height > 5 cm and a height greater than 1.3 m. 
Acronyms: 
CAR – Climate Action Reserve 
CDM - Clean Development Mechanism 
GPG LULUCF - Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change‘s Good Practice Guidance for Land-Use, Land Use 
Change and Forestry 
IFM - Improved Forest Management (VCS project type) 
LtPF – Logged to Protected Forest (VCS IFM project sub-type) 
PD - Project Description  
VCS - Verified Carbon Standard 
VCU - Verified Carbon Units