6 
BASELINE SCENARIO 
The baseline scenario is identified as the existing or historical land management practices, under 
the assumption that these would continue in the absence of the project. The baseline land 
management activities, such as plans (or lack thereof) for fire management, number of grazing 
animals and the duration and timing of grazing particular areas of land, must have been in place 
during the baseline period. In the case that management activities have changed during the 
baseline period, such changes must be documented and the activities leading to the lowest net 
emissions or greatest removals during the baseline period must be chosen as the most plausible 
baseline scenario. 
To develop the baseline scenario, the project proponent must document, using published or 
gathered project-specific data and/or models, historic grazing plans or use of grazing areas by 
livestock and fire histories in the project area. The method to determine the most plausible 
baseline condition is provided in Section 8 (Baseline Emissions) with additional information 
provided in Section 9.3 (Description of the Monitoring Plan). The method includes: 
1) Where adjustments in fire frequency and/or intensity are a project activity, the project 
proponent must demonstrate a fire history, as a map of areas that burned and the 
number of times they burned over the previous ten years. This may be obtained by using 
satellite products, such as MODIS Burned Area Product4 as detailed in Section 9.3.5) 
that provide polygons of burned areas for 15 day periods throughout the dry or burning 
season. A GIS program like Quantum GIS (2.6)5, and other programs like IDRISI 6 or 
ArcGIS, may perform similar functions. Project proponents may also use dated aerial 
                                                
4 http://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/) 
5 Quantum GIS 2.4 can be downloaded for free at https://www.qgis.org 
6 http://www.clarklabs.org 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 17 
photographs or accurate hand-drawn maps accompanied by records of where and when 
land parcels burned.  
2) As evidence of past grazing practices and impacts, the project proponent must 
demonstrate a grazing history, as determined from past livestock grazing animal counts, 
ground measurements of grazing impacts, and/or ground-validated interpretations of 
satellite imagery (such as the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), Soil-
Adjusted Vegetation Index (SAVI), or other similar index[12, 13]) from a minimum of four 
intervals across the 10 years, with at least one image from 8-10 years prior to the project 
start date.  
3) Baseline methane emissions require as detailed as possible livestock grazing animal 
censuses through any combination of professional aerial surveys, ground counts with 
appropriate spatial extrapolation to the project area[14, 15], or household surveys of 
livestock held by each household over the previous 10 years. Censuses must categorize, 
to the extent possible, the species, sex, and age of each animal, and an average body 
weight for each category7. 
4) Aboveground woody biomass must be sampled at the project start from many locations in 
the project area (see Section 8.1.3.5) and if necessary for inclusion as a parameter in soil 
carbon models, analyzed for neutral detergent fiber, cellulose, and lignin in a professional 
laboratory. 
5) Initial soil carbon stocks must be measured to the desired depth following Section 
8.1.3.3. The chosen depth must match that applicable to the chosen soil carbon model if 
the modeled approach is used.  
6) Where the modeled approach is used, predictions of soil carbon stocks or stock changes 
from the chosen model of soil carbon dynamics, such as Century[3, 4, 16], must be tested to 
demonstrate it is appropriate for use in the project area with measured soil carbon stocks 
or stock changes from the project area. Correlations between predicted and observed 
stocks must have R2 > 0.80 within strata and an uncertainty based on a 95 percent 
confidence interval of < 20 percent for predicted values applicable to the project area. 
The use of  less accurate model predictions imply larger confidence limits in estimated 
carbon stocks or stock change after 10 years and thus larger uncertainty deductions in 
claimed emission reductions. If a model cannot be found to provide sufficient accuracy, 
the measured approach must be used.  
7) The selected model is used to model the soil carbon dynamics and to estimate the 
maximum SOC that would have occurred in the 10 years prior to the project start date.  
This provides an uncertainty deduction for activity-based emission reduction calculations.  
                                                
5 
IPCC, Emissions from livestock and dung management, in Guidelines for Nartional Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
2006, IPCC. p. 1-85. 
7  
Such data are necessary to use Tier II methods of calculating methane emissions per IPCC 2006 guidelines 
 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 18 
8) Where the measured approach is used, estimates of initial soil carbon stocks within 
different strata must also calculate an uncertainty based on a 95 percent confidence 
interval, with uncertainty deductions imposed if uncertainty exceeds + 15 percent. 
9) Uncertainty propagated by all estimated emissions and reductions must be calculated for 
baseline emissions, project emissions and reductions. Uncertainty deductions will occur if 
the total uncertainty + 15% percent of estimated net emissions and removals under the 
project scenario. The deducted removals must be directly proportional to the uncertainty.