2 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE 
METHODOLOGY 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
 
This methodology applies to projects that avoid unplanned deforestation (AUD). The baseline 
must include planned or unplanned logging for timber, fuel-wood collection, charcoal 
production, agriculture or grazing activities, as long as the category is Avoiding Unplanned 
Deforestation according to the most recent VCS Standard. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
2 
The forest landscape configuration may be mosaic, frontier or a transition between the two. It is 
globally applicable except where the project area includes forested wetlands growing on peat 
(e.g., peat swamp forests). 
Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) for reducing GHG emissions from avoided degradation and for 
enhancing carbon stock in forest that would be deforested in the baseline case are excluded 
from this methodology.  
The eligible categories of project activity covered by this methodology are represented with the 
letters A to H in Table 1 and Appendix 1. 
Table 1: Scope of the Methodology 
  
PROJECT ACTIVITY 
Protection without 
logging, fuel-wood 
collection or charcoal 
production 
Protection with 
controlled logging, 
fuel-wood collection or 
charcoal production 
BASELINE 
Deforestation 
Old-growth without logging 
A 
B 
Old-growth with logging 
C 
D 
Degraded and still degrading 
E 
F 
Secondary growing 
G 
H 
No deforestation 
Old-growth without logging 
No change 
Degradation 
Old-growth with logging 
IFM 
IFM-RIL 
Degraded and still degrading 
IFM 
IFM 
Secondary growing 
No change 
Degradation 
TABLE NOTES 
No deforestation 
If the baseline is not deforestation, the change in carbon stocks is not covered in 
this methodology. 
 
Accounting for carbon stock decrease due to timber harvesting, fuel-wood collection and 
charcoal production is mandatory in the project scenario where the decrease is significant. 
Accounting the increase of carbon stocks in forests that would be deforested in the absence of 
the project is conservatively omitted. 
Leakage in this methodology is subject to monitoring, reporting, verification and accounting 
(MRV-A). However, where the project area is located within a broader sub-national or national 
region that is subject to MRV-A of GHG emissions from deforestation under a VCS Jurisdictional 
and Nested REDD+ (JNR) program, leakage may be subject to special provisions because any 
change in carbon stocks or increase in GHG emissions outside the project area would be 
subject to MRV-A under the broader jurisdictional program. In such cases, the most recent VCS 
JNR Requirements must be applied.  
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
3 
The methodology defines four spatial domains: a broad “reference region,” the “project area,” a 
“leakage belt,” and a “leakage management zone.”1 The project area, leakage belt and leakage 
management zones are subsets of the reference region and are always spatially distinct (not 
overlapping) areas (see Figure 1). 
Figure 1: Spatial Domains Considered in this Methodology 
Figure 1a: Frontier configuration 
 
 
 
 
1 Leakage management zone and leakage management area are used interchangeably in this methodology. Both 
correspond to the same spatial domain.    
Reference region 
Project area 
Leakage management zone 
Leakage belt 
Forest  
Non-forest 
Deforested during the  
historical reference period 
Projected deforestation 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
4 
Figure 1b: Mosaic configuration 
 
• 
The “reference region” is the analytical domain from which information on historical 
deforestation is extracted and projected into the future to spatially locate the area that 
would be deforested in the baseline case.  
• 
The “project area” is the area (or areas) under the control of project participants in 
which the AUD project activity will be implemented and GHG emission reductions 
accounted. 
• 
The “leakage belt” is the area where deforestation avoided in the project area may be 
displaced as a result of project implementation. Any deforestation above the baseline 
projection that is monitored in the leakage belt is considered leakage.  
• 
The “leakage management zone” is the area (or areas) specifically designed to 
implement activities that reduce the risk of activity displacement leakage. These are 
areas dedicated to enhanced crop-land and grazing land management, agro-forestry, 
silvo-pastoral activities and reforestation activities. Leakage management zones must 
be non-forest land at the project start date. 
The baseline projections must be revisited at the frequency set out in the most recent version 
of the VCS Standard and adjusted, as necessary, based on land use and land cover changes 
observed during the past period and changes at the level of agents, drivers and underlying 
causes of deforestation, which are subject to monitoring. The period of time during which a 
validated baseline must not be reassessed is called the “baseline validity period.” The baseline 
may be reassessed before the fixed baseline expires only where an applicable jurisdictional 
baseline becomes available. 
Reference region 
Project area 
Leakage management zone 
Leakage belt 
Forest  
Non-forest 
Deforested during the  
historical reference period 
Projected deforestation 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
5 
Emissions of non-CO2 gases in the baseline are conservatively omitted, except CH4 emissions 
from biomass burning, which may be accounted where fire is the main technology used to 
deforest and where the project proponent considers that ignoring this source of emissions 
would substantially underestimate baseline emissions. However, CH4 emissions from forest 
fires in the project case must be accounted where they are significant.  
This methodology considers two potential sources of leakage: 
1) Activity-shifting leakage: Where deforestation in the leakage belt is higher during 
project implementation than was projected under the baseline scenario, this is 
considered as activity displacement leakage, and the decrease in carbon stocks and 
increase in GHG emissions (where emissions from forest burning are included in the 
baseline) must be subtracted from the project’s net GHG emissions reductions. 
2) Increased GHG emissions due to leakage prevention measures: Where leakage 
prevention measures include tree planting, agricultural intensification, fertilization, 
fodder production and/or other measures to enhance cropland and grazing land areas 
in leakage management zones, any decrease in carbon stocks and increase in GHG 
emissions associated with these activities must be estimated and subtracted from the 
project’s net emissions reductions. 
Any decrease in carbon stock or increase in GHG emissions attributed to the project activity 
must be accounted where significant, otherwise it may be neglected. Significance in this 
methodology is assessed using a specific tool described in Appendix 2: Testing Significance of 
GHG Emissions. 
The nine steps for the ex ante calculation of net GHG emissions reductions are summarized in 
Figure 2. Project proponents should refer to each of these steps and their sub-sections using 
the same titles and numbers as indicated in the VCS Project Description (PD) Template so that 
application of the methodology may be transparently validated.  
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
6 
Figure 2: Steps for Ex Ante Calculation of Net GHG Emission Reductions and Indicative 
Reporting Section in the VCS Project Description Template 
 
 
Step 4. Project the annual amount and location of deforestation in the reference 
region in the baseline scenario (Section 8.1.3 of the methodology, Section 4.1 of the 
VCS PD Template). 
Step 1. Define the boundaries of the proposed AUD project activity: spatial 
boundaries, temporal boundaries, carbon pools and sources of GHG emissions 
(Section 5 of the methodology, Section 3.3 of the VCS PD Template). 
Step 3. Analyze historical land use and land cover change in the reference region over 
the historical reference period (Section 8.1.1 of the methodology, Section 4.1 of the 
VCS PD Template). 
Step 5. Identify forest classes present in the areas expected to be deforested under 
the baseline scenario and the post-deforestation land use classes in the project area 
(Section 8.1.4 of the methodology, Section 4.1 of the VCS PD Template).  
Step 7. Estimate ex ante actual carbon stock changes and non-CO2 emissions under 
the project scenario (Section 8.2.1 of the methodology, Section 4.2 of the VCS PD 
Template). 
Step 9. Calculate ex ante net anthropogenic GHG emission reductions (Section 8.4.1 of 
the methodology, Section 4.4 of the VCS PD Template). 
Step 8. Estimate ex ante leakage emissions associated with leakage prevention 
measures and activity displacement (Section 8.3.1 of the methodology, Section 4.3 of 
the VCS PD Template). 
Step 6. Estimate baseline carbon stock changes and, where forest fires are included 
in the baseline assessment, non-CO2 emissions from biomass burning (Section 8.1.5 
of the methodology, Section 4.1 of the VCS PD Template). 
Step 2. Analyze the agents, drivers, underlying causes of deforestation and typical 
chain of events that lead to land use and land cover change (Section 6.2 of the 
methodology, Section 3.4 of the VCS PD Template). 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
7