4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to a broad range of project activities that increase SOC storage 
and/or decrease net emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O from ALM operations compared to the 
baseline scenario. The methodology is globally applicable. 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
1) Projects introduce or implement one or more new changes to pre-existing ALM practices 
which: 
a) Improve fertilizer (organic or inorganic) management; 
b) Improve water management/irrigation; 
c) Reduce tillage/improve residue management;  
d) Improve crop planting and harvesting (e.g., improved agroforestry, crop rotations, 
cover crops); and/or 
e) Improve grazing practices.  
Appendix 1 provides a non-exhaustive list of eligible ALM practices. A change in practice 
constitutes adoption of a new practice, cessation of a pre-existing practice, or 
adjustment to a pre-existing practice that results in reductions or removals. 
2) Projects introduce or implement quantitative adjustments (e.g., decrease in fertilizer 
application rate) that exceed 5% of the pre-existing value, calculated as the average 
value over the historical look-back period, developed for the baseline schedule of 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 10 
 
 
activities (see Section 6). Appendix 1 gives additional details and guidance on practices 
and on determining practice change.  
3) Project activities are implemented on land that is either cropland or grassland at the 
project start date. The land must remain cropland or grassland throughout the project 
lifetime except under the following scenarios: 
a) Introduction of temporary grassland into cropland where it is demonstrated, prior 
to the project start date and to the addition of new project activity instances, that 
the integration of forage crops (e.g., annual/perennial grasses, legumes) into 
annual crops is part of a planned, long-term ALM system (e.g., integrated crop-
livestock system). Project proponents must provide documentation of the long-
term management plans, covering the duration of the project, that describe 
proposed practices, crops, and expected benefits and outcomes of integrated 
grassland-cropland management; or 
b) A one-time conversion from grassland to cropland or vice versa where it is 
demonstrated, prior to project validation, that project lands in the baseline 
scenario are degraded and the introduction of improved land use change 
practices would significantly improve soil health. Project proponents must provide 
documentation demonstrating that lands are degraded at the start of the project 
and degradation will continue in the baseline scenario due to the presence of 
degradation drivers or pressures in the baseline scenario. See Appendix 2 for 
procedures on how to propose this type of land use change.  
4) Empirical or process-based models used to estimate stock change/emissions via 
Quantification Approach 1 are:  
a) Publicly available, though not necessarily free of charge,4 from a reputable and 
recognized source (e.g., the model developer’s website, IPCC, or government 
agency). Sufficient conceptual documentation of inputs, outputs, and information 
on how the model functionally represents SOC dynamics must be accessible to 
the public. The project proponent must include the model source in the project 
description (e.g., hyperlink to the model and date of webpage access or citation 
of peer-reviewed publication). Providing the source code or an API for 
independent replication of calculations is not required;  
b) Shown in peer-reviewed scientific studies to successfully simulate changes in 
SOC and trace gas emissions resulting from the changes in ALM practices 
included in the project description; 
c) Able to support repetition of the project model simulations. This includes clear 
versioning of the model used in the project and stable software support, as well 
as fully reported sources and values for all parameters used with the project 
version of the model. Where multiple sets of parameter values are used in the 
project, clearly identify the sources of varying parameter sets and how they were 
applied to estimate stock change/emissions in the project. Acceptable sources 
 
4 It is the responsibility of the project proponent to ensure they have any required licenses for models used in a project. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 11 
 
 
include peer-reviewed literature and statements from appropriate expert groups 
that demonstrate evidence of expertise with the model via authorship of peer-
reviewed model publications or authorship of reports for entities supporting 
climate-smart agriculture. These sources must describe the datasets and 
statistical processes used to set parameter values;  
d) Validated per datasets and procedures detailed in Section 5.2 of VCS Module 
VMD0053 Model Calibration, Validation, and Uncertainty Guidance for Improved 
Agricultural Land Management. Model prediction error must be calculated using 
datasets as described in Section 5.2.5 of VMD0053 and must use the same 
parameters or sets of parameters applied to estimate stock change/emissions in 
the project; and 
e) Using the same model version in the baseline and project scenarios. Further, the 
same parameters/parameter sets must be used in the baseline and project 
scenarios. Model input data must be derived following guidance in Table 6 and 
Table 8. Model uncertainty must be quantified following guidance in Section 8.6.  
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
5) The project area has been cleared of native ecosystems within the 10-year period 
immediately prior to the project start date. 
6) The project activity is expected to cause a sustained reduction in productivity of greater 
than 5%, as demonstrated by peer-reviewed and/or published studies on activity in the 
region or a comparable region. 
7) The project activity is biochar application. Biochar may be applied as a soil amendment 
in the project area provided that the total organic carbon content5 of the biochar 
applied is subtracted from the estimated SOC stock change in the project scenario at 
each verification event.  
8) The project activities occur on a wetland; this condition does not exclude crops subject 
to artificial flooding where it is demonstrated that crop cultivation does not impact the 
hydrology of any nearby wetlands.