6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
Considering current market trends, existing government policies and legal requirements, 
socioeconomic conditions, and technological developments in the agriculture sector, the 
continuation of pre-project ALM practices is determined to be the most plausible baseline 
scenario (see further justification in Appendix 3). For each quantification unit (e.g., for each 
field), baseline scenario practices are set to match the practices implemented in the historical 
look-back period, creating an annual schedule of activities to be repeated throughout the first 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 14 
 
 
baseline period.8 Baseline emissions/stock changes are then modeled (Quantification 
Approach 1) or (for SOC stock change only) directly measured in baseline control sites subject 
to the annual schedule of activities (Quantification Approach 2). Note that under Quantification 
Approach 1, direct SOC stock estimates are also required at time t = 0 years to serve as model 
input for model initialization.9 The crops and practices assumed in the baseline scenario must 
be reassessed every ten years in accordance with the requirements of the most recent version 
of the VCS Standard and revised, where necessary, to reflect current agricultural production in 
the region.10 However, where regional production practices change and/or data becomes 
available across shorter timeframes, it is recommended to reassess the baseline every five 
years. 
Development of Schedule of Activities in the Baseline Scenario 
For each quantification unit, a schedule of activities in the baseline scenario is determined by 
assessment of practices implemented during the period prior to the project start date. The 
interval over which practices are assessed, x years, must be a minimum of three years and 
must include at least one complete crop rotation, where applicable. Where a crop rotation is not 
implemented in the baseline, x ≥ 3 years. For each year, t = −1 to t = −x (i.e., years preceding 
project start), information on ALM practices must be determined, per the requirements 
presented in Table 4. 
In most cases, quantitative information is associated with related qualitative information (see 
Box 1). Thus, a negative response on a qualitative element would mean there is no quantitative 
information related to that practice, whereas a positive response on a qualitative element 
requires quantitative information related to that practice. 
The schedule of activities, beginning with year t = −x, is applied in the baseline scenario, from 
t = 1 onward, repeating every x years through the end of the first baseline period. 
The schedule of activities in the baseline scenario is valid until baseline reassessment. At the 
end of each baseline period, production of the commercial crop(s) in the baseline scenario is 
re-evaluated. Published regional (sub-national) agricultural production data from within the five 
years immediately preceding the end of the current baseline period must be consulted.  
• 
Where there is evidence of continued production of the relevant commercial crop(s) 
using the same ALM practices in the region, the baseline scenario is valid as-is, 
continuing with the previous schedule of activities.  
 
8 For example, where the schedule of activities includes tillage events in years t = −3 and −1 but does not involve tillage 
in year t = −2, the schedule of activities for tillage in the baseline scenario would be tillage, no tillage, tillage. This 
pattern would be repeated as follows for the first baseline period: tillage, no tillage, tillage, tillage, no tillage, tillage, 
tillage, no tillage, tillage, tillage. 
9 Per Table 6, baseline SOC stocks may be (back-)modeled to t = 0 from measurements collected within ±5 years of 
t = 0. 
10 See Section 3.2.7 of the VCS Standard, v4.7.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 15 
 
 
• 
Where there is no evidence of continued production of the relevant commercial crop(s), 
a new schedule of ALM activities (evaluated against common practices in the region) is 
developed based on written recommendations for the sample field provided by 
independent professional agronomists, agricultural experts such as soil scientists, 
husbandry specialists, and agronomists, or representatives of a governmental 
agricultural body, including government agricultural extension agents. 
Recommendations must provide sufficient detail to produce the minimum 
specifications on ALM practices for the baseline scenario as outlined in Table 4.  
• 
Where more than one value is documented in recommendations (e.g., where a range of 
application rates are prescribed in written recommendations), the principle of 
conservativeness must be applied, selecting the value that results in the lowest 
expected emissions (or highest rate of stock change) in the baseline scenario. 
• 
Where evidence is not field-specific, conservatively derived field-specific values must be 
supported by a documented method justifying the appropriateness of selection. 
Table 4: Minimum specifications for ALM practices in the baseline scenario 
ALM Practice 
Qualitative 
Quantitative 
Crop Planting and Harvesting 
• Crop type(s) 
• Approximate date(s) planted (where 
applicable) 
• Approximate date(s) 
harvested/terminated (where 
applicable) 
• Crop yield (where applicable) 
Nitrogen Fertilizer Application 
• Manure (Y/N) 
• Compost (Y/N) 
• Synthetic N fertilizer 
(Y/N)  
• Manure type application rate (where 
applicable) 
• Compost type application rate 
(where applicable) 
• N application rate in synthetic 
fertilizer (where applicable) 
Tillage and/or Residue 
Management 
• Tillage (Y/N) 
• Crop residue removal 
(Y/N)  
• Depth of tillage (where applicable) 
• Frequency of tillage (where 
applicable) 
• Percent of soil area disturbed 
(where applicable) 
• Percent of crop residue removed 
(where applicable) 
Water Management/Irrigation  
• Irrigation (Y/N) 
• Flooding (Y/N) 
• Irrigation rate (where applicable) 
Grazing Practices 
• Grazing (Y/N) 
• Animal type (where 
applicable) 
• Harvesting/mowing 
(Y/N) 
• Animal stocking rate (i.e., number of 
animals and length of time grazing 
in each area annually, where 
applicable) 
• Frequency of harvest  
Liming 
• Application of calcitic 
limestone or 
dolomite (Y/N) 
• Calcitic limestone or dolomite 
application rate (where applicable) 
*Y/N: Yes/No 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 16 
 
 
  
Box 1: Sources of qualitative and quantitative data 
Sources of information for all undefined activity/management-related model input variables (see Table 6 
and Table 8), and all parameters relevant to the baseline scenario (i.e., all parameters with the subscript 
bsl that reference Box 1 in its respective parameter table), must follow the requirements detailed below. 
All qualitative information on ALM practices must be determined via consultation with, and substantiated 
with a signed attestation from, the farmer or landowner of the sample field during that period. Where the 
farmer or landowner is not able to provide qualitative information (e.g., a sample field is newly leased), the 
project proponent must follow the quantitative information hierarchy outlined below.  
The following list specifies the allowable sources of quantitative information on ALM practices in 
descending order of preference, as available: 
1) Historical management records supported by one or more forms of documented evidence 
pertaining to the selected sample field and period t = −1 to t = −3 (e.g., management logs, 
receipts or invoices, farm equipment specifications, logs or files containing machine and/or 
sensor data) or remote sensing (e.g., satellite imagery, manned aerial vehicle footage, drone 
imagery), where requisite information on ALM practices can be reliably determined with these 
methods (e.g., tillage status, crop type, irrigation) 
2) Historical management plans supported by one or more forms of documented evidence pertaining 
to the selected sample field and period t = −1 to t = −3 (e.g., management plan, 
recommendations in writing solicited by the farmer or landowner from an agronomist). Where 
more than one value is documented in historical management plans (e.g., where a range of 
application rates are prescribed in written recommendations), the principle of conservativeness 
must be applied and the value that results in the lowest expected emissions (or highest rate of 
stock change) in the baseline scenario must be selected. 
3) A signed attestation from the farmer or landowner of the sample field during that period – where 
the attested value does not deviate significantly from other evidence-supported values for similar 
fields (e.g., fertilizer data from adjacent fields with the same crop, adjacent years of the same 
field, government data on application rates in that area, or statement from a local extension agent 
regarding local application rates). The VVB must determine whether the data are sufficient. In 
circumstances where this requirement is not met, Option 4 must be followed. 
4) Regional (sub-national) average values derived from agricultural census data or other sources 
from within the 20-year period preceding the project start date or the 10 most recent iterations of 
the dataset, whichever is more recent. Where estimates have been disaggregated by relevant crop 
or ownership classes, those should be used. The estimates must be substantiated with a signed 
attestation from the farmer or landowner of the sample field during that period. Examples include 
the USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service Quick Stats database and USDA Agricultural 
Resource Management Survey.  
This hierarchy applies to any additional quantitative inputs required by the model (Quantification 
Approaches 1 and 2) or default factor (Quantification Approach 3) selected. The principle of 
conservativeness must be applied in all cases. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 17