8 
STRATIFICATION  
If the project activity area at the start of the project is not homogeneous, stratification may be carried 
out to improve the accuracy and the precision of carbon stock estimates. Different stratifications may be 
required for the baseline and with-project scenarios in order to achieve optimal accuracy of the 
estimates of net GHG emissions or removal.  
Strata must be spatially discrete and defined on the basis of forest carbon stocks or expected changes 
in forest carbon stocks. Stratum sizes must be known. Areas of individual strata must sum to the total 
project area. Strata must be identified with spatial data (eg, maps, GIS coverage, classified imagery, or 
sampling grids) from which the area can be determined accurately. Land use/land cover maps in 
particular must be ground-truthed and current, less than 10 years old. Strata must be discernible taking 
VM0005, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 11 
 
into account good practice in terms of the accuracy requirements for the definition of strata limits / 
boundaries. This must be indicated in the project description and the choice must be justified. 
For estimation of baseline net GHG emissions or removals, or estimation of project net GHG emissions 
or removals, strata must be defined on the basis of parameters that are key entry variables used to 
estimate changes in biomass stocks. 
The project area may be stratified ex ante, and this stratification may be revised ex post for monitoring 
purposes. Strata need only reflect consistent differences in biomass stocks and not for example 
species composition or ecological variables. Established strata may be merged if reasons for their 
establishment have disappeared or have proven irrelevant to key variables for estimating forest carbon 
stocks or changes in forest carbon stocks. 
For baseline net GHG emissions or removals: Stratification is carried out according to pre-project 
carbon stocks. This stratification must be determined prior to the project activity. For each stratum, 
assumptions must be made as to how the carbon stocks would be affected in the business as usual 
scenario. In case of relogging, this must be based on the relogging that has taken place in an 
appropriately selected reference area or on the basis of reliable management or logging plans for the 
project area indicating anticipated logging intensities. The remaining carbon stocks per stratum must be 
determined. 
For project net GHG emissions and removals. The ex-ante estimations must be based on the project 
plan, which must include a timetable for and scheduling of the silvicultural interventions, such as for 
example liberation thinning and enrichment planting. The ex-post stratification must be based on the 
actual implementation of the projected activities. The ex-post stratification may be affected by natural or 
anthropogenic impacts if they add variability to growth pattern in the treated project area. 
Baseline stratification must occur only once and remain fixed for the lifetime of the project, unless 
baseline monitoring occurs in a reference area. 
Stratification in the with-project scenario must be updated at the time of each and every monitoring 
campaign prior to verification based on recent developments. 
For ex-ante and ex-post stratification, project proponents may optionally make use of remote sensing 
data and analysis platforms acquired close to the time the project commences.