5 PROJECT BOUNDARY 
The following categories of boundaries must be defined: 
• 
The geographic boundaries relevant to the project activity; 
• 
The temporal boundaries; 
• 
The carbon pools that the project will consider; and 
• 
The sources and associated types of greenhouse gas emissions that the project will 
affect. 
5.1 
Geographical Boundaries 
5.1.1 General 
The spatial boundaries16F16 of a project must be clearly defined to facilitate accurate measuring, 
monitoring, accounting, and verification of the project’s emissions reductions and removals. The 
project activity may contain more than one discrete area of land. When describing physical 
project boundaries, the following information must be provided per discrete area:  
1) Name of the project area (e.g., compartment number, allotment number, local name) 
2) Unique ID for each discrete parcel of land 
3) Map(s) of the area in the format required by the VCS Standard 
4) Geographic coordinates of each polygon vertex along with the documentation of their 
accuracy (from a geo-referenced digital map – data must be provided in the format 
specified / required by the VCS) 
5) Total land area, and  
 
16 For WRC project activities, including subtidal seagrass areas, where relevant. 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
19 
6) Details of landholder and user rights. 
The geographical boundaries of a project are fixed (ex-ante) and cannot change over the 
project lifetime (ex post). Where multiple baselines exist (e.g., planned deforestation, unplanned 
deforestation, forest degradation, degraded land) there must be no overlap in boundaries 
between areas appropriate to each of the baselines. Thus, two project types cannot occur on 
the same piece of land, other than those including a WRC component (i.e., combined 
REDD+WRC). 
All land areas registered under any other GHG program must be transparently reported and 
excluded from the project area. The exclusion of land in the project area from any other GHG 
program must be monitored over time and reported in the monitoring reports. 
5.1.2 REDD  
The boundary of the REDD activity must be clearly delineated and defined and include only land 
qualifying as forest for a minimum of 10 years prior to the project start date. Mangrove forests 
are excluded from any tree height requirement in a forest definition, as nearly 100% or all of their 
vegetation consists of mangrove species, which often do not reach the same height as other tree 
species, and they occupy contiguous areas. Ecologically, their functioning as a forest is 
independent of tree height. 
In REDD project activities, various kinds of boundaries must be distinguished, depending on the 
REDD category (planned or unplanned deforestation, forest degradation), i.e., in case of: 
1) Avoiding planned deforestation: project area and proxy area(s). Refer to Module BL-PL 
for the detailed procedures to define these boundaries. 
2) Avoiding unplanned deforestation: project area, reference region, and leakage belt. 
Refer to Module BL-UP for definitions and the detailed procedures to define these 
boundaries. 
These procedures also apply to CIW or combined REDD+CIW project activities, see Section 5.1.4.  
Methods for establishing the boundaries of areas subject to leakage from activity shifting are 
provided in the following modules: 
• 
For avoiding planned deforestation: Module LK-ASP 
 
• 
For avoiding unplanned deforestation: Module BL-UP 
 
5.1.3 WRC  
The WRC project area must meet the definition as provided in the VCS Standard: “The project 
area shall meet an internationally accepted definition of wetland, such as from the IPCC, Ramsar 
Convention on Wetlands, those established by law or national policy, or those with broad 
agreement in the peer-reviewed scientific literature for specific countries or types of wetlands. 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
20 
Common wetland types include peatland, salt marsh, tidal freshwater marsh, mangroves, wet 
floodplain forests, prairie potholes, and seagrass meadows.” 
For RWE project activities, the project area must not have been drained or converted to create 
GHG emissions reductions/removals. Such proof is not required where such draining or 
conversion took place prior to 1 January 2008. Areas that do not meet this requirement must be 
excluded from the project boundary. 
The maximum eligible quantity of GHG emission reductions in WRC project activities is limited to 
the difference between the remaining SOC stock in the project and baseline scenarios after 100 
years. If a significant difference at the 100-years mark cannot be demonstrated, the project area 
is not eligible. The assessment must be executed ex-ante using conservative parameters. 
Procedures are provided in Module X-STR. 
WRC project activities in tidal zones must take into account the effects of sea-level rise on project 
boundaries. Procedures are provided in Module X-STR. 
In CIW project activities that are not combined with REDD activities, various types of boundaries 
must be distinguished, depending on the CIW category (i.e., planned or unplanned wetland 
degradation). For example, in the case of: 
1) Avoiding planned wetland degradation (APWD), the project area and proxy area(s) must 
be defined. Refer to Module BL-PL for the detailed procedures to define these 
boundaries. 
2) Avoiding unplanned wetland degradation (AUWD), the project area, reference regions 
for wetland degradation, and leakage belt area must be defined. Refer to Module BL-UP 
for definitions and the detailed procedures to define these boundaries. 
5.2 
Temporal Boundaries 
The following temporal boundaries must be specified: 
5.2.1 Start Date and End Date of the Historical Reference Period 
REDD 
The historical reference period is the fixed time period during which historical deforestation and 
forest degradation is analyzed in the reference region to set the forward-looking baseline, the 
duration of which is set out in the VCS Methodology Requirements. At validation, the historical 
reference period ends at the start of the crediting period. Once the project has started, and a 
baseline update is calculated, the historical reference period ends at the time at which the 
baseline is updated.  
 
VM0007, v1.8