3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions, the following definitions 
apply to this methodology: 
Animal Group 
Animals at a farm, grouped based on a homogeneous ruminant population characteristic such 
as animal type, weight, production phase (e.g., pregnant or lactating cow) or feeding regime 
Diet 
Feed ingredients or mixture of ingredients, including water, that is consumed by animals 
Dry Matter Intake (DMI) 
The amount of feed that an animal consumes per day, on a moisture-free basis 
Emission Reduction Factor 
Percentage reduction in enteric methane emissions per animal per day due to project feed 
ingredient or additive 
Enteric Fermentation 
A natural digestive process in ruminants whereby microbes catabolize and ferment feed 
present in the digestive tract or rumen. Enteric methane is one by-product of this process and is 
expelled by the animal mostly through eructation and respiration. 
Enteric Methane 
Methane emissions from ruminants, due to enteric fermentation of feed 
Feed(s) 
Edible material(s) that are consumed by an animal and contribute energy and/or nutrients to 
the animal’s diet 
Feed Ingredient 
A component part or constituent of any combination or mixture making up a feed, whether it 
has a nutritional value in the animal’s diet, including feed additives. Ingredients are of plant, 
animal, or aquatic origin, or other organic or inorganic substances.1 
Gross Energy 
The total caloric energy contained in feed 
 
1 Definition from FAO and WHO (2004). Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding CAC/RCP 54. 
Available at https://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius/thematic-areas/animal-feed/en/#c437068. 
 
VM0041, Version 2.0 
6 
Livestock Production Operation 
An agricultural setting — permanent or semi-permanent facility, grazing or non-grazing area — 
where domesticated animals are kept or raised either indoors or outdoors to provide traction or 
produce livestock commodities2 
Methanogenesis 
The anaerobic formation of methane in the rumen by microorganisms known as methanogens 
Neutral Detergent Fiber (NDF) 
A measure of the structural components (i.e., lignin, hemicellulose, cellulose, tannins, and 
cutins) within the cells of plants, which provides an estimate of fiber constituents of feedstuffs 
and indicates maturity. Generally, the higher the NDF, the more mature and lower quality the 
forage. 
Reticulo-Rumen 
The first large compartment of the stomach of a ruminant where fermentation, which allows for 
the digestion of fiber and other feeds, occurs 
Ruminant 
A mammal that has a different digestive system to monogastric (single stomach) animals. The 
primary differences are that the “stomach” of a ruminant consists of four compartments, and 
ruminants have the ability to regurgitate digesta and chew them, a process known as 
rumination. Ruminants are able to acquire nutrients from plant-based feeds by fermenting the 
feed in the biggest compartment, the rumen, prior to digestion. Ruminating mammals include 
species such as cattle, goat, sheep, deer, giraffe, and antelope.