24 
I 
= Number of dwellings 
J 
= Number of fuel types 
j 
= Fuel type 
y 
= Any consecutive twelve months during the project’s crediting period, and must 
be defined with an integer from 1 on in a consecutive manner 
Leakage emissions must be calculated as follows: 
Where:  
LCO2,y 
= Leakage emissions from continued operation of appliances in year y (t CO2/yr) 
LHFC,y 
= Leakage emissions from improper disposal of refrigerators, air conditioners or 
heat pumps in year y (t CO2/yr) 
LHFC OP,y 
= Leakage emissions from refrigerant leaks during operation in year y (t CO2/yr) 
 
Leakage from continued operation of appliances must be calculated as follows: 
ܮ஼ை2,௬= ∑(ܽ௡௣,௞,௬∗ℎ௞∗ܧௗ௘௠,௣௥௘,௞) ∗ܧ݈݁ܿ஼ை2 +
௄
௞=௟
∑ܮ(௬−௧),஼ை2
்−1
௧=1
 
(7a) 
Where:  
anp,k,y 
= Appliance type k not properly disposed of in year y 
K 
= Number of appliance types 
Edem,pre,k 
= Electricity demand of appliance type k before replacement 
hk 
= Annual working hours of appliance type k 
ElecCO2 
= Emission factor for grid electricity (t CO2e/kWh) 
T 
= Years from the beginning of the crediting period (number) 
When fuel switching applies, EFf,CO2 will substitute for ElecCO2 and Ef,dem,pre,k will be applied 
across each energy source f using Equation (9b): 
 
ܮ஼ை2,௬=
∑
(ܽ௡௣,௞,௬∗ܧ௙,ௗ௘௠.௣௥௘,௞∗ℎ௞−௣௥௘) ∗ܧܨ௙,஼ை2 +
∑
ܮ(௬−௧),஼ை2
௧=1 ௧௢ ்−1
௞=1 ௧௢ ௄,௙
 
(9b) 
Where:  
EFf,CO2 
= Emission factor for energy source f (t CO2e/Btu) 
Ef,dem,pre,k 
= Energy demand of appliance type k using energy source f before replacement 
(Btu/hour) 
hk-pre 
= Annual working hours of appliance type k before replacement 
ܮ௬= ܮ஼ை2,௬+ ܮܪܨܥ,ݕ+ ܮܪܨܥ ܱܲ,ݕ 
(6) 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
25 
Leakage from improper disposal of refrigerators, air conditioners or heat pumps must be 
calculated as follows: 
ܮுி஼,௬= ∑ܽ௡௣,௞,௬∗ܴܥܥ௔∗ܩܹܲோ∗
௄
௞=௟
1௧
1,000,000௚
 
(8) 
Where:  
RCCa 
= Charge capacity of refrigerant gas of replaced cooling or heat pump appliance a 
(grams) 
GWPR 
= Global Warming Potential of refrigerant gas R used in appliance (t CO2e/t gas) 
 
Refrigeration equipment often uses blends of HFC refrigerant gases. The GWP of these blends 
must be calculated based on the proportion of different refrigerants used.16 The GWP values 
from the most recent version of the VCS Standard must be used. 
Leakage emissions from refrigerant leaks during operation must be accounted for unless the 
project proponent can demonstrate that one of the following conditions is met: 
a) the installation/operation of the new refrigerators, air conditioners or heat pumps 
replace baseline appliances which also contain refrigerants;17 or  
b) LHFC OP,y, can be demonstrated to be de minimis. 
Otherwise, leakage emissions from refrigerant leaks during operation must be calculated per 
Equation (9). Such leakage emissions must also be accounted for if the project proponent 
cannot demonstrate which baseline appliances are replaced or demonstrate that the baseline 
appliances did not contain refrigerants. 
ܮுி஼ ை௉,௬=
∑
ܽ௞,௬,ை௉ௌ∗ܴܥܥ݅݊ݏݐ݈݈ܽ݁݀௔∗ܩܹܲ௥∗ܮܴ%௞,௬/1000000
௞=1 ௧ℎ௥௨ ௄
 
(9) 
Where:  
ak,y, OPS 
= Number of appliances of type k in operation during project year y 
RCCinstalleda 
= Charge capacity of refrigerant gas of installed cooling or heat pump 
appliance a (grams) 
GWPR 
= Global Warming Potential of refrigerant gas R used in appliance 
(t CO2e/t gas) 
LR%k,y 
= Annual leakage rate of refrigerant gas R used in appliance type k (t CO2e/t 
gas) 
K 
= Number of appliance types 
 
16 Examples of the available compositions of refrigerant blends are available at the US Environmental Protection Agency 
website: http://www.epa.gov/Ozone/snap/refrigerants/refblend.html  
17 In this case, there is reasonable comparability between operational leak rates for baseline and project appliances so that 
LHFC OP,y,  can be set at zero (e.g., if a refrigerator replaces an old refrigerator, if a heat pump replaces an old air conditioner). 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
26 
k 
= Appliance type 
LR% default values may be applied: 
Table 2. LR % Values 
Technology 
LR% Value 
Source Reference 
Heat Pumps 
 
DEFRA18, EPA/industry 
experts19 
Air source HP, split system 
1-4% if justified to VVB or 
3.5% as default value 
 
Air source HP, self contained 
central system 
<1% 
 
HPWH 
0.3% 
 
Geothermal Closed Loop HP 
0.3% 
 
Air Conditioning 
 
EPA20 
Small, self contained 
<1% 
 
 
Small, split system 
1-4% 
 
Refrigerators 
0.3% 
DEFRA21 
The grid emission factor (ElecCO2) must be calculated in a transparent and conservative manner 
based on one of the following approaches: 
1) A combined margin, consisting of the combination of operating margin and build 
margin according to the procedures prescribed in the most recent version of 
VT0011 Electricity System Emission Factors. The grid emission factor must be 
monitored following either the Ex ante option or the Ex post option within the tool.  
OR 
2) The weighted average emissions (in t CO2e/kWh) of the current generation mix 
obtained from a regulated source. The data from the most recent year for which data 
are available must be used. The grid emission factor must be monitored annually, and 
updated as the regulated source publishes data. If the grid emission factor is published 
later than year y, the emission factor from an earlier year, up to three years prior (y − 3), 
may be used.  
The ECF represents the trend in electricity demand based on average electricity consumption 
within a region or state over a period of at least ten years. Historical data from a recognized 
 
18 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/impacts-of-leakage-from-refrigerants-in-heat-pumps 
19 https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-12/documents/international_transitioning_to_low-
gwp_alternatives_in_res_and_com_ac_chillers.pdf    
20 https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-12/documents/international_transitioning_to_low-
gwp_alternatives_in_res_and_com_ac_chillers.pdf   
21 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/impacts-of-leakage-from-refrigerants-in-heat-pumps 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
27 
national authority may be used to determine the ECF. Projected trends in changes in the rate of 
electricity demand reported by a national authority may also be used as the ECF.22 The ECF 
must be stated as a multiplier. For example, 0.98 represents an electricity consumption growth 
rate of −2%.  
The ECF is used to update the baseline electricity consumption based on decreases in 
electricity demand over time. The ECF must only be applied when it is less than 1 to maintain 
conservativeness in the emission reduction calculation. This factor must be applied to the 
calculation of the emission reductions after project implementation because electricity 
consumption in the baseline may not remain the same (see Figure 3). The factor must be 
determined from local, regional or national electricity household consumption data from a 
government agency, a public utility or regulatory agency, or a recognized energy research 
organization.  
In a situation where overall electricity consumption decreases, the Electricity Correction Factor 
ECF ensures against over-estimation of emission reductions (see Figure 4). 
Figure 4 shows how the adjusted consumption approach takes into account a reduction in 
electricity consumption over time. Failure to adjust for decreasing consumption over time would 
result in an over-estimation of emission reductions. 
Figure 4. Reduction in electricity consumption as a result of an adjusted consumption 
approach 
 
 
22 Examples of reported values that may be used as an ECF are available at the Department of Energy website: 
http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/states/electricity.cfm/state=ME.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
28 
The heating/cooling degree day correction factors (HDDCF and CDDCF) are used to update the 
baseline energy consumption annually based on changes in temperature. These factors 
account for changes in heating/cooling degree days and associated changes in heating and 
cooling loads (see Figure 3). The factors must be determined based on data from reputable 
regional or national meteorological organizations.23  
The heating degree day correction factor must be calculated as follows: 
ܪܦܦܥܨ௬= ܪܦܦ௬
ܪܦܦ௕
 
(10) 
Where:  
HDDy 
= Heating degree days for year y after the retrofit 
HDDb 
= Heating degree days for one year before the retrofit 
The cooling degree day correction factor must be calculated as follows: 
ܥܦܦܥܨ௬= ܥܦܦ௬
ܥܦܦ௕
 
(11) 
Where:  
CDDy 
= Cooling degree days for year y after the retrofit 
CDDb 
= Cooling degree days for one year before the retrofit 
Figure 5 shows how heating degree days affect fuel/electricity consumption over time. Failure 
to adjust the baseline based on changes in temperature would result in inaccurate calculation 
of emission reductions. 
 
23 An example of such organization is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in the United States.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
29 
Figure 5. Fuel/electricity consumption change caused by heating degree days 
 
8.1.1 Quality Assurance 
 When using the adjusted consumption approach, a sample group of dwellings weatherized as 
part of the project must be monitored to ensure the reduction in energy consumption and 
resulting reduction in emissions is real. The sample group must measure the emission 
reductions resulting from the change in energy consumption. In case of a significant 
discrepancy between emission reductions calculated according to the approach and emission 
reductions calculated from the sample group, the adjusted baseline consumption approach 
must be calibrated accordingly. The sample size of the sample group must be established by 
multiplying 0.6 by the square root of the total number of dwellings, i, or appliances, included in 
the project.24 Monitoring of the sample group for quality assurance must occur for two years 
and must consist of collecting electricity and fuels bills that represent a twelve month period. 
When the data come from two different processes, such as the adjusted consumption 
calculation and the measurements from the sample group, significant discrepancy is defined on 
the basis of an independent two-sample t-test for equality of two means. If the value T of the 
above statistic obtained from a t-value table or calculation is greater than the corresponding 
value of the t-distribution for a 95% confidence level and degrees of freedom given by 2n − 2, 
then the null hypothesis of equal means is rejected and the observed discrepancy is concluded 
to be significant. 
 
24 The equation for determining the minimum sample size number for quality assurance purposes was taken from the 
surveillance requirements in the IAF Guidance on the Application of ISO/IEC Guide 66 Issue 4 IAF GD: 2006.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
30 
A t-test is a standard statistical tool and readily available. One of the t-tests set forth below 
must be applied. The particular test must be determined by the type of samples, samples sizes 
and assumptions made on the underlying population variances. 
1) An independent two-sample t-test for samples of equal sizes and equal variances must 
be used when the number of observations (data points) in both samples is equal and it 
can reasonably be assumed that the population variance of both samples is the same. 
2) An independent two-sample t-test for unequal sample sizes and equal variances must 
be used when the number of observations (data points) in both samples is not equal 
and it can reasonably be assumed that the population variance of both samples is the 
same. 
3) An independent two-sample t-test for unequal sample sizes and unequal variances 
must be used when the two data samples are of unequal size and it can be reasonably 
assumed that the population variance is different. This test is referred to as Welch’s t-
test.  
The parameters to be monitored in the adjusted consumption approach are listed in Section 9. 
8.2 
Pre- and Post-Retrofit Audit Approach 
The emission reductions are calculated as follows: 
Monitoring emission reductions must be based on the data generated by a pre- and post- 
retrofit energy audit for a sample of the dwellings. A pre-retrofit audit must take place once 
before project implementation for every dwelling and a post-retrofit audit must take place once 
after the retrofit has been completed for a sample of the dwellings. In every multi-family 
building, a representative sample of the dwellings must undergo a pre- and post-retrofit audit. 
The pre-retrofit audit must determine the electricity demand and heat load in the baseline. The 
pre-retrofit electricity demand and heat load must then be compared to the post-retrofit 
electricity demand and heat load. This comparison must provide the electricity demand 
reduction factor and the heat load reduction factor, which must be used to calculate emission 
reductions created by the project.  
To calculate GHG emission reductions, the reduction factors obtained from the pre- and post- 
energy audit must be applied to the baseline consumption of electricity and fuel. The result 
must then be multiplied by the emission factor of the fuel type. Reductions must be adjusted for 
changes in electricity demand over time and adjusted for heating/cooling degree days during 
the project crediting period. 
Energy auditors must be certified by a public authority or a private certification program 
recognized by a public authority. Energy audits must be conducted using industry best-
practices, cover both fuel and electricity consumption, include diagnostic tests (such as a 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
31 
blower door test, pressure pan test or thermal imaging) and use energy modeling software, or 
appropriate calculations.25  
The electricity demand reduction factor (EDF) must be calculated for a sample of the dwellings 
as follows:  
ܧܦܨ= 1 −
∑
ܧௗ௘௠,௣௢௦௧,௦
ௌ
௦=1
∑
ܧௗ௘௠,௣௥௘,௦
ௌ
௦=1
 
(12) 
Where:  
EDF 
= Electricity demand reduction factor (no unit) 
Edem,post,s 
= Electricity demand post-retrofit for dwelling s (kW) 
Edem,pre,s 
= Electricity demand pre-retrofit for dwelling s (kW) 
S 
= Number of sample dwellings 
s 
= Sample dwelling undergoing post retrofit audit 
The heat load reduction factor (HLF) must be calculated for a sample of the dwellings as 
follows:  
ܪܮܨ= 1 −
∑
ܪ௟௢௔ௗ,௣௢௦௧,௦
ௌ
௦=1
∑
ܪ௟௢௔ௗ,௣௥௘,௦
ௌ
௦=1
 
(13) 
Where:  
HLF 
= Heat load reduction factor (no unit) 
Hload,post,s 
= Heat load post-retrofit for dwelling s (kWh/m2) 
Hload,pre,s 
= Heat load pre-retrofit for dwelling s (kWh/m2) 
S 
= Number of sample dwellings 
s 
= Sample dwelling undergoing post retrofit audit 
Reductions must be calculated as follows: 
ܧܴ௬= ∑
ܧ݈݁ܿ௕,௜
ூ
௜=௟
∗ܧܦܨ∗ܧܥܨ௬∗ܥܦܦܥܨ௬∗ܧ݈݁ܿ஼ை2 + ∑
ܨ௕,௜,௝
ூ,௃
௜,௝=௟
∗ܪܮܨ∗
ܪܦܦܥܨ௬∗ܥ݈ܽ௝∗ܨ஼ை2 −ܮ௬  
(14) 
Leakage, Ly, must be calculated using Equation (6). 
 
25 In the United States there are several established energy auditing programs that are credible and accepted as industry 
best practice. Examples include, but are not limited to RESNET HERS rating, Building Performance Institute Audit, Home 
Performance with Energy Star, Maine Certified Energy Audit, Energy Plus. The certification process is a substitute for a single 
industry standard. 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
32 
8.2.1 Quality Assurance 
When using the pre- and post-audit approach, energy bills based on direct metering of 
consumption must be collected for one year pre-retrofit and compared with post-retrofit energy 
bills based on direct metering of consumption in a sample of dwellings. When dealing with non-
regulated fuels, an acceptable alternative measure must be compared to that same measure 
as shown in the post-retrofit audit to ensure the energy savings were achieved. The sample size 
for quality assurance samples must be established by multiplying the 0.6 by square root of the 
total number of dwellings, i, or appliances, included in the project. The reduction in demand as 
calculated in Equation (12) and Equation (13), must be compared to the reduction in 
consumption based on directly metered electricity or natural gas consumption data, or in the 
case of non-regulated fuels an acceptable alternative measure. The sample group must be 
tested for a significant discrepancy between the calculated reduction in energy demand as 
shown in the post-retrofit audit and actual reduction in consumption calculated from directly 
metered energy bills. When dealing with non-regulated fuels an acceptable alternative measure 
must be used, as noted above. If the discrepancy between the two mean values is found to be 
significant, the mean energy consumption from the directly metered value must be used to 
calculate the HLF or EDF. 
When the two data samples come from the same dwelling, significant discrepancy is defined on 
the basis of a dependent two-sample t-test for equality of two means. If the t-value of the above 
statistic obtained from a t-value table or calculation is greater than the corresponding value of 
the t-distribution for a 95% confidence level and degrees of freedom given by n − 1, then the 
null hypothesis of equal means is rejected and the observed discrepancy is concluded to be 
significant. 
A dependent two-sample t-test must be applied to test for the difference of the two means. The 
two means to be compared must be from the sample group of weatherized dwellings, and must 
be the mean of the energy demand determined by the post-retrofit audit and the mean of the 
directly metered energy bill in the case of electricity and natural gas. However, in the case of 
non-regulated fuels, the two means compared must be based on an acceptable alternative 
measure, such as blower door test value as shown in the post-retrofit audit, and the blower 
door test value recorded one year post-retrofit.  
The parameters to be monitored in the pre-and post-retrofit audit approach are listed in Section 
9. 
8.3 
Control Group Approach 
In this approach a control group and a sample group must be defined. The control group must 
be comprised of dwellings from the same building stock that are not, and must not be 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
33 
weatherized.26 The sample group must be comprised of dwellings to be weatherized, or, in the 
case of mobile homes, replaced. Electricity and fuel bills must be collected for both groups 
annually throughout the project crediting period. The control group must consist of dwellings 
that have not been weatherized as part of the project. The project must not prevent or deny 
weatherization to any homeowner, or individual for the purpose of maintaining the control 
group. Instead, as the population of weatherized dwellings increases, the control group sample 
may include different dwellings as long as the control group contains only non-weatherized 
dwellings. 
The difference in the energy consumption between the control group and the sample group 
each year will constitute the fuel and electricity savings for all dwellings in the project for that 
year and must serve as the basis for calculating emission reductions.27  
The sample group must come from dwellings included in the project activity. The control group 
must be selected from dwellings not included in the project activity and must have the following 
requirements:  
1) Participants must not have the ability to “opt-in” to the control group.  
2) Once selected, homeowners must be required to make their fuel and electricity bills 
available to the project. Where appropriate, the homeowner will be requested to sign a 
waiver granting the project proponent electronic access to directly metered electricity 
and gas bills. 
3) Dwellings must be in the same building stock.  
GHG emission reductions must be calculated as follows: 
ܧܴ௬= ∑
{(ܧ݈݁ܿ஼ீ,௬,௕−ܧ݈݁ܿௌீ,௬,௕) ∗ܧ݈݁ܿ஼ை2}
஻
௕=1
+ ∑
{(ܨ஼ீ,௬,௝,௕−ܨௌீ,௬,௝,௕) ∗ܥ݈ܽ௝∗
௃
௝=1
ܨ஼ை2௝} ∗ܫ௕−ܮ௬,௕  
(15) 
Where:  
ElecSG,y,b 
= Mean electricity consumed by sample group dwellings in building stock b in year 
y 
ElecCG,y,b 
= Mean electricity consumed by control group dwellings in building stock b in year 
y 
FSG,y,j,b 
= Mean fuel type j consumed by sample group dwellings in building stock b in year 
y 
 
26 The control group sample size must be large enough to be statistically valid. When approaching complete saturation of 
weatherized homes, the control group will diminish in size as the number of non-weatherized homes diminishes. This is a 
risk that must be weighed when choosing the control group approach. One option for addressing the diminishing control 
group is to use the control group approach for as long as possible and then switch to the adjusted consumption approach. 
The control group monitoring will be able to be used as the baseline in the adjusted consumption approach.  
27 Since the energy consumed by retrofitted dwellings must be directly compared to the energy consumed by non-retrofitted 
dwellings within the same building stock and the same year, there is no need to apply the electricity and heating/cooling 
degree day correction factors. 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
34 
FCG,y,j,b 
= Mean fuel type j consumed by control group dwellings in building stock b in year 
y 
Ib 
= Number of dwellings in building stock b 
Ly,b 
= Leakage in building stock b in year y 
Leakage, Ly,b, must be calculated for each building stock using Equation (6). 
To ensure conservativeness in the emission reduction calculation approach, a 95% confidence 
interval, with an alpha value equal to 5% (α =0.05) must be applied to the fuel and/or 
electricity consumption within the control group and the sample group, denoted by ElecSG,y,b, 
ElecCG,y,b, FSG,y,j,b, and FCG,y,j,b above. The lower bound of the confidence interval of the control 
group, and the upper bound of the confidence interval of the sample group must be the values 
compared to determine the emission reductions resulting from project activity.  
The 95% confidence interval must be calculated as follows:  
𝑥−ܼ0.025(ܵܧ) < ߤ< 𝑥+ ܼ0.025(ܵܧ)  
ܵܧ= ߪ
√݊
⁄
 ܽ݊݀ ߪ= ݏ∗√݊/(݊−1)  
(16) 
Where:  
x 
= Mean energy consumption calculated from the sample 
Z0.025 
= 1.960, established standard value 
s 
= Standard deviation calculated from the sample 
n 
= Sample size 
µ 
= Mean of the population; not actually calculated, instead it is contained within 
the upper and lower bounds of the equation 
SE 
= Standard error 
σ 
= Standard deviation that approximates the standard deviation of the population, 
used to calculate the standard error 
The parameters to be monitored in the control group approach are listed in Section 9. 
8.4 
Deemed Savings Approach 
 Emission reductions for the replacement of appliances must be calculated as follows: 
1) The energy demand (rated capacity) of both the appliance to be replaced and of the 
replacement appliance must be determined from the nameplate, manufacturer’s 
specification sheet, or direct metering;  
2) The typical annual hours of operation of the appliance to be replaced in the project 
area must be recorded or, for HP/HPWHs, modelled (see Section 4 for modelling 
requirements);  
3) The GHG emission reductions from an individual appliance must be calculated by 
comparing the energy demand of the replacement appliance with that of the replaced 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
35 
appliance, multiplied by annual hours of operation and by the grid emission factor. To 
account for failed operation of appliances a correction factor must be applied.  
GHG emission reductions must be calculated as follows: 
ܧܴ௬= ∑
ܽ௞(ܧ௙,ௗ௘௠.௣௥௘,௞∗ℎ௞−௣௥௘∗ܧܨ௙,௣௥௘,஼ை2 −ܧ௙,ௗ௘௠௡.௣௢௦௧,௞∗
௞=1 ௧ℎ௥௨ ௄,௙
ℎ௞−௣௢௦௧∗ܧܨ௙,௣௢௦௧,஼ை2) ∗ܥ݋ݎݎ௞−ܮ௬  
(17) 
Where:  
Ef,dem,pre,k 
= Energy demand of appliance type k using energy source f before the 
replacement takes place (Btu/hour) 
Ef,dem.post,,k = Energy demand of appliance type k using energy source f after the 
replacement (Btu/hour) 
hk-pre 
= Annual working hours of the appliance type k before replacement (hours) 
hk-post 
= Annual working hours of the appliance type k after replacement (hours) 
Corrk 
= Correction factor for failed operation of each appliance type k 
ak 
= Number of appliances of type k 
K 
= Number of appliance types 
K 
= Appliance type 
Ff,pre,CO2 
= 
Emission factor for energy sources f applicable before replacement (t 
CO2e/Btu) 
Ff,post,CO2 
= 
Emission factor for energy sources f applicable post replacement (t CO2e/Btu) 
 
Leakage, Ly, must be calculated using Equation (6).  
Note – EFf,pre,CO2 and EFf,post,CO2  are calculated using the procedures for EFf,CO2 which are given 
in Equation (9b) as emission factor for energy source f (t CO2e/Btu). 
Note – When baseline and project appliances use electricity as their energy source f, Ef,dem,pre,k 
and Ef,dem,post,k can be supplied in kWh, whereupon EFf,pre/post,CO2 must then be substituted by 
ElecCO2, (applied appropriately pre and/or post) using the grid emission factor per Equation (5).  
Modelling results for HP and HPWH will yield comparable Btu (or kWh) results (that is Edem × hk 
both pre and post) for baseline and project (pre/post) appliances (not Btu/hour as E is defined 
in Equation (17)) since the models calculate the equivalent hours that HP/HPWHs need to run 
to deliver the same level of service as the baseline systems. So the Btu/kWh results from 
modelling will incorporate both the product of both the E and Hk factors. 
Monitoring must consist of verifying the operation of a sample of the appliances within the first 
year of installation and in three year intervals thereafter or, for HP/HPWHs, modelling results .  
The parameters to be monitored in the deemed savings approach are listed in Section 9. 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
36 
8.5 
Mobile Homes Approach 
GHG emission reductions for the replacement of mobile homes must be calculated as follows: 
1) The heat load of both the mobile home to be replaced and of the replacement home 
must be determined from best practice heat load modelling. In the case of the home to 
be replaced, the heat load must be calculated by applying a heat load formula that 
applies a default energy consumption value determined from statistically significant 
fuel consumption records.28 In the case of the replacement home, the heat load must 
be modelled taking into account the building specifications. The building specifications 
may include but are not limited to; R-value of insulation in the floor, walls and ceiling, U-
value and size of the windows, and the R-value of the skirting.  
2) Emission reductions must be based on the difference between pre- and post-
replacement heat load29 and pre-and post-replacement size of the mobile home, 
multiplied by the annual heating/cooling degree days, and both the calorific value and 
the emission factor of the fuel consumed within the dwelling.30  
3) If appliances are replaced at the same time the mobile home is replaced, the 
calculation of emission reductions from appliance replacement must follow the deemed 
savings approach. Total emission reductions must be the sum of emission reductions 
from the replacement of the mobile home plus the emission reductions from 
replacement of the appliances, minus leakage.  
GHG emission reductions must be calculated as follows:  
ܧܴ௬=
∑
(ܪ௝,௟௢௔ௗ௣௥௘,௜∗ܵ௣௥௘,௜−ܪ௝,௟௢௔ௗ.௣௢௦௧,௜∗ܵ௣௢௦௧,௜) ∗ܪܦܦ௬∗ܨ஼ை2,௝ + ܧܴ஺ோ௬
௜=1 ௧௢ ூ,௝
 
(18) 
Where:  
Hj,load,pre,i 
= Heat load from fuel type j of mobile dwelling i to be replaced (GJ/m2/HDD) 
Hj,load,post,i 
= Heat load from fuel type j of replacement dwelling I (GJ/m2/HDD) 
HDDy/CDDy = Heating/cooling degree days 
Spre,i 
= Size of dwelling i to be replaced (m2) 
Spost,i 
= Size of replacement dwelling i (m2) 
ERARy 
= Emission reductions from appliance replacement 
 
28 The heat load formula must be based on best practice energy modeling software that takes into account the number of 
rooms, the metric size of the rooms, the energy load per meter, and the degree days of the region. In the United States, for 
example, the design heat load calculation that is used to determine fuel award amounts in the national Low Income Home 
Energy Assistance Program may be used. That equation is: number of rooms multiplied by the square feet per room, 
multiplied by the Btu consumption per square foot per degree day multiplied by degree days, all divided by 1 000 000 Btus 
to yield the MBtu needed to heat/cool the space. In metric the equation would be: number of rooms multiplied by the 
square meters per room, multiplied by the kJ consumption per square meter per degree day multiplied by degree days, all 
divided by 1 000 000 kJ to determine the GJ needed to heat/cool the space. 
29 The heat load of a dwelling must include cooling load when both heating and cooling are provided by one central system.  
30 When electricity is the central heating/cooling source, the grid electricity factor must replace both the fuel calorific value 
(Calj) and the fuel emission factor (FCO2,j). In this case, the heat load must be expressed in kWh per square meter per degree 
day.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
37 
i 
= Number of dwellings 
Note – In a region with a predominantly hot climate, the equation may be changed to 
incorporate cooling load Cj,load,pre,j and cooling degree days CDDy, which would replace Hj.load,pre,j 
and heating degree days HDDy respectively.  
GHG emission reductions from appliance replacement, ERARy, must be calculated using (17).  
The parameters to be monitored in the mobile homes approach are listed in Section 9.