10 REFERENCES 
IPCC (2003). Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry. Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES).   
IPCC (2006). 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Institute for Global 
Environmental Strategies (IGES).  
IPCC (2019). 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines on National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories. Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). 
Additional references may be found in the modules referenced throughout this methodology. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
19 
APPENDIX 1: TESTING SIGNIFICANCE OF 
GHG EMISSIONS 
The following stepwise procedure must be used to test the significance of GHG emissions. It is an 
adaptation of the CDM Tool for testing the significance of GHG emissions in A/R CDM project activities, 
v01. The procedure may be used to justify the omission of pools and GHG sources within the project 
boundaries, as well as to justify the omission of GHG emissions resulting from leakage mitigation 
measures. 
The significance of GHG emissions by source and carbon stock changes by pool must be at minimum 
tested ex ante to justify the project boundaries and at baseline reassessment. The significance of leakage 
GHG emissions must be tested ex ante for the entire baseline validity period and ex post for a specific 
monitoring period. 
1) Define the period over which the significance will be tested (i.e., either a baseline validity 
period for ex ante estimates or a specific monitoring period or annually for ex post 
estimates). 
2) Identify and estimate the following where relevant: 
a) GHG emissions by source (per each source) to be included and tested for the specified 
period. Estimation must be based on site/project-specific data, scientific peer-reviewed 
literature and/or the most recent default emission factors provided by IPCC.  
b) GHG emissions attributable to net carbon stock changes by pool (per each pool to be 
included and tested). The estimation of net carbon stock changes must follow the 
methodology and be consistent with the baseline scenario and project activities. 
Estimation must be based on site/project-specific data, scientific peer-reviewed 
literature and/or the most recent default emission factors provided by IPCC.  
c) Leakage GHG emissions by source attributable to the project leakage mitigation 
measures (i.e., net carbon stock changes in above- and belowground tree biomass, 
emissions associated with biomass burning and nitrogen application) that the planned 
leakage mitigation measures are expected to cause during the fixed baseline period. 
Estimation must follow sound procedures consistent with calculation approaches in the 
applicable activity-type module(s). Estimation must be based on site/project-specific 
data, scientific peer-reviewed literature and/or the most recent default emission 
factors provided by IPCC. 
3) Where needed, convert the GHG emissions to CO2e using 100-year global warming 
potential (GWP) values from the latest version of the VCS Standard.  
4) Calculate the relative contributions of the GHG emissions listed in Step 2a–c above 
according to the following equation:  
 
VM0048, v1.0 
20 
끫뢊𝑅𝑅끫롰끫뢬=
끫롰끫뢬
∑
끫롰끫뢬
끫롸
끫뢬=1
 
(2) 
Where: 
끫뢊𝑅𝑅끫롰끫뢬 
= 
Relative contribution of each source i to the sum of project and leakage GHG 
emissions 
끫롰끫뢬 
= 
GHG project and leakage emissions for source i as estimated under Step 2a–c 
above 
i 
= 
Index for individual sources of project and leakage GHG emissions due to 
leakage mitigation measures (I = total number of sources considered in Step 1) 
5) Rank the GHG emissions in descending order of their relative contributions RCEi and order 
them according to their ranks (i.e., the lowest emission must get the highest rank and must 
occupy the last position in the ordered sequence of leakage emissions). 
6) Start calculating the cumulative sum of the relative contributions RCEi (ordered according to 
Step 5), beginning with the lowest rank. Cease the summation when the cumulative sum 
reaches the lowest value not less than the threshold of 0.95. 
The GHG and project leakage emissions by source excluded from the cumulative sum in Step 6 are 
considered insignificant where their total is lower than five percent of net anthropogenic GHG ERRs in the 
project area. Otherwise, the procedure described in Step 6 must be continued beyond the threshold of 
0.95 until this condition is met. Even where they are insignificant, project proponents may include any 
qualifying sources and sinks in the project case. 
For the purposes of testing GHG emissions significance, the net GHG ERRs must be calculated before 
discounting the cumulative GHG emissions resulting from leakage (i.e., before discounting ΔCLK-UDef,t). 
Significance test calculations must be summarized in the project description or monitoring reports and 
detailed in a calculation spreadsheet to be shared with the validation/verification body and Verra. 
 
 
 
 
VM0048, v1.0