3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions, the following definitions 
apply to this methodology.  
Alternate wetting and drying (AWD) 
A system of cultivating irrigated lowland rice using controlled and intermittent irrigation cycles 
according to a periodic drainage and re-flooding schedule (i.e., alternating flooded and non-
flooded field conditions by multiple (more than one) drainage events during the cultivation 
period) in addition to end-of-season drainage. This water management technique uses less 
water than the usual system of continuously flooded irrigation in the crop field.  
Avoided biomass burning 
Residue management system in which residue (i.e., rice straw) is not burned after harvest 
Baseline control site 
Defined area that is managed according to pre-project (baseline) practices (as set out in the 
schedule of activities) for direct measurement of CH4 using flux chambers and that is 
representative of the land and management practices in one or more quantification units 
Continuous flooding  
A system of cultivating irrigated lowland rice where fields have standing water throughout the 
rice growing season and are drained only shortly before the maturing growth stage and for 
harvesting the rice (i.e., end-of-season drainage) 
Controlled irrigation 
A type of water management where the project has irrigation systems in place that allow for 
controlled management of the water regime (i.e., the project farmer has control of the water 
flow rate, flooding duration, etc.) 
Cultivation pattern 
The set of activities and machinery operations used to cultivate rice in the project area. This 
requires describing quantitative and qualitative details related to the implementation of the 
project activities and management practices (e.g., time, duration, rate, and frequency of wet 
(flooded) and dry (non-flooded) periods, machinery operations, fertilization practices, and weed 
and pest control) 
Cultivation period 
The period of time that begins with pre-planting preparation in rice fields and ends at the 
harvest event 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
8
Direct seeded rice (DSR) 
A system of cultivating irrigated lowland rice in which seeds, either pre-germinated or dry, are 
broadcast or sown directly in the field under dry or wetland conditions. No transplanting 
process is involved. DSR reduces the duration of flooding periods compared to transplanted 
rice with continuous flooding. For DSR, the field must be dry before seeding and remain dry 
during sowing until the seed has germinated so that viable, young plantlets can withstand 
shallow flooding (at the two–four leaf stage). 
Digital monitoring, reporting, and verification (DMRV) tools 
Tools used to enable digital capture, analysis, tracking, and dissemination of data to enable 
monitoring, reporting, and verification 
Historical look-back period 
The time period prior to the project start date covering at least three years of rice cultivation 
and a complete crop rotation, if any. The historical look-back period is used to produce the 
schedule of activities. 
Liming 
The application of calcium- and magnesium-rich materials such as lime or limestone to soil to 
neutralize soil acidity 
Methanotrophs 
Organisms that occur naturally or are introduced to an environment and metabolize CH4 to 
obtain their energy, thereby removing CH4 from their environment 
Quantification unit 
The unit below the project level and the unit at which GHG emission reductions and carbon 
dioxide removals and associated uncertainty are estimated using the selected quantification 
approach. Depending on the sampling design, the quantification unit may be a stratum, a 
cluster of fields, or another unit or group of units.  
Sample unit 
Unit at which measurements are taken during gas sampling under Quantification Approach 2 
Scaling factor  
A numerical multiplier that is applied to an emission factor to align it with observed data from 
specific national or regional conditions. It is used to minimize biases, refine calculations, or 
downscale global emission factors. 
Schedule of activities 
An annual schedule of historical management activities (e.g., irrigation, fertilizer usage, and 
biomass amendments) applied in the baseline and derived from the historical look-back period. 
The schedule is determined following the data requirements given in Box 1. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
9
Single drainage 
A system of cultivating irrigated lowland rice using a controlled and intermittent irrigation cycle 
(i.e., fields have a single drainage event and period during the cropping season at any growth 
stage) in addition to the end-of-season drainage 
Soil methanogenesis 
Microbial process that produces methane (CH4) gas in soils when microorganisms break down 
organic matter under anoxic conditions, such as in waterlogged soils 
Stratification 
The act of dividing the project area into relatively homogeneous strata. Stratification can occur 
at the project level and within a quantification unit. 
Stratum 
A discrete area in which biophysical factors are more homogeneous than they are across the 
project area as a whole 
Water regime 
The water management system used within a rice production system (i.e., the irrigation 
method)