9 MONITORING 
9.1 
Data and Parameters Available at Validation 
Relevant parameters are detailed within accounting and other source modules. 
9.2 
Data and Parameters Monitored 
Relevant parameters are detailed within accounting and other source modules. 
9.3 
Description of the Monitoring Plan 
9.3.1 Development of Monitoring Plan 
General 
The monitoring plan must address the following tasks: 
• 
Monitoring of project implementation; 
• 
Monitoring of actual carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions; 
• 
Monitoring of leakage carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions; and 
• 
Estimation of ex post net carbon stock changes and greenhouse gas emissions. 
For each of these tasks, the monitoring plan must include the following information: 
• 
Technical description of the monitoring task; 
• 
Data to be collected (data and parameters to be collected must be listed in the project 
description); 
• 
Overview of data collection procedures; 
• 
Quality control and quality assurance procedures;  
• 
Data archiving; and 
• 
Organization and responsibilities of the parties involved in all of the above. 
Uncertainty and Quality Management 
As far as is practical, uncertainties related to the quantification of GHG emission reductions 
should be reduced. 
Uncertainties arising from input parameters would result in uncertainties in estimating baseline 
and project net GHG emissions – especially where global default factors are used. The project 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
15 
must identify critical parameters that would significantly influence the accuracy of estimates. 
Local values specific to the project circumstances must be obtained for these key parameters 
where possible. These values should be based on: 
• 
Cited data from well-referenced peer-reviewed literature or other well-established 
published sources; 
• 
National inventory data or default factors from IPCC literature that have, where possible 
and necessary, been checked for consistency against available local data specific to the 
project circumstances; or 
• 
Expert opinion, in the absence of the above sources of information. Experts will often 
provide a range of data values and a proposed value for the data. The rationale for 
selecting a particular data value must be demonstrated. 
In choosing key parameters or making important assumptions based on information not specific 
to the project circumstances, such as using default factors, the project proponent must select 
values that will lead to an accurate estimation of net GHG emission reductions, taking into 
account uncertainties. 
Where uncertainty is significant,4 the project proponent must choose data that indisputably tends 
to under-estimating, rather than over-estimating, net GHG project benefits. 
To ensure that GHG fluxes are estimated in a way that is accurate, verifiable, transparent and 
consistent across measurement periods, the project proponent must establish and document 
clear standard operating procedures and procedures for ensuring data quality. At a minimum, 
these procedures must include: 
• 
Comprehensive documentation of all field measurements taken in the project area. This 
documentation must be detailed enough to allow replication of sampling in the event of 
staff turnover between monitoring periods; 
• 
Training procedures for all people involved in field measurement or data analysis. The 
scope and date of all training must be documented; 
• 
A protocol for assessing the accuracy of plot measurements using a check cruise and a 
plan for correcting the inventory where errors are discovered; 
• 
Protocols for assessing data for outliers, transcription errors and consistency across 
measurement periods; and 
• 
Safe archiving of data sheets for the lifetime of the project. Data stored in electronic 
formats must be backed up. 
 
4 In line with the VCS Methodology Requirements, uncertainty is deemed significant where it is expected to exceed 10 
percent of the estimate. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
16 
Expert judgment 
The use of expert judgment for selecting and interpreting methods, selecting input data to fill 
gaps in available data and selecting data from a range of possible values or uncertainty ranges 
are all well defined in the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National GHG Inventories and its 2019 
Refinement. The project proponent must use the guidance provided in Volume 1 Chapter 2 
Approaches to Data Collection (in particular, Section 2.2 and Annex 2A.1) of the IPCC 2019 
Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories. 
Monitoring of Project Implementation 
Information must be provided and recorded to establish the following: 
1) The geographic position of the project boundary is recorded for all areas of land. The 
geographic coordinates of the project boundary (and any stratification or buffer zones 
inside the boundary) are established, recorded and archived. This may be achieved by 
field survey (e.g., GPS) or geo-referenced spatial data (e.g., maps, GIS datasets, 
orthorectified aerial photography or geo-referenced remote sensing images). 
The above also applies to strata recording, including strata resulting from peatland fires 
in the project scenario. 
2) Commonly accepted principles of land use inventory and management are implemented. 
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) and quality control/quality assurance procedures 
for inventories, including field data collection and management, must be applied. Use or 
adaptation of SOPs already applied in national land use monitoring or available from 
published handbooks or the latest IPCC guidance documents is recommended. 
The project plan and a record of the plan as implemented during the project must be 
available for validation or verification, as appropriate. 
3) The monitoring plan must use the methods in the relevant module(s) (i.e., AUDef, APDef, 
and/or AUDeg) to monitor changes in forest cover and carbon stock changes. All relevant 
parameters from the modules must be included in the monitoring plan. 
9.3.2 Monitoring 
Ex post monitoring must accomplish two key tasks: 
1) Monitoring according to the monitoring plan; and 
2) Revising the baseline for future project crediting periods. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
17 
TASK 1: Monitoring According to the Monitoring Plan 
Monitoring of Key Baseline Variables 
Information required to periodically reassess the project baseline must be collected during the 
entire project crediting period. Key variables to be measured are: 
• 
Changes in forest cover as specified in the relevant accounting modules (e.g., AUDef) 
• 
Spatial variable datasets used in modeling, as specified in relevant accounting modules 
(e.g., AUDef). As a minimum, the variables used in the first baseline assessment must be 
monitored during any reassessments. 
• 
Carbon stock data, where required, as specified in the relevant accounting module 
Monitoring of Leakage 
All significant sources of leakage identified are subject to monitoring following the procedures 
outlined in the monitoring plan. Such procedures must be consistent with the applicable leakage 
modules. The monitoring plan must include all relevant parameters in the leakage modules. 
Reporting of Parameters in Each Monitoring Report 
The following values must be reported using the unit in parentheses, each with an estimate of 
uncertainty, representing sampling error as a two-sided 90 percent confidence interval: 
1) For projects using AUDef, the allocated annual deforestation area by stratum (hectares 
for each year of the monitoring period); 
2) Aggregate annual deforestation area for the verification period in the project area 
(hectares per year); 
3) Aggregate annual deforestation area for the verification period in the leakage belt 
(hectares per year); 
4) Aggregate annual emissions from deforestation for the verification period and project 
area (tonnes CO2e per year); 
5) Aggregate annual emissions from deforestation for the verification period and leakage 
belt (tonnes CO2e per year); and 
6) Average emission factor for deforestation for the verification period and over the project 
area (tonnes CO2e per hectare). 
Additional values may be added as additional modules are added under this VM0048. 
TASK 2: Revising the Baseline for Future Project Crediting Periods 
The methodological procedure to update the baseline must be the same as in the first baseline 
estimation. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
18