1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
This Logged to Protected Forest (LtPF) methodology provides a detailed procedure to estimate 
the net GHG emission reductions/removals resulting from the implementation of Improved 
Forest Management (IFM) projects aimed at the protection of forests that would be logged in 
the absence of the project. 
The core methodological components are as follows: 
• 
Determine Eligibility: Sets the criteria for eligibility of projects under the methodology. 
• 
Set Project Boundaries and Scope: Provides guidelines for defining the geographical 
and temporal boundaries of the project and lists the GHG emissions sources and 
carbon pools to be included in the project. 
• 
Assess Baseline Scenario, Additionality and Baseline Modelling: Provides guidelines to 
select the most conservative baseline scenario and to determine the additionality of 
the project. 
• 
Quantify Baseline Emissions: Provides a detailed procedure to develop conservative 
estimates of net greenhouse gas emissions resulting from changes in carbon stocks as 
a result of planned timber harvest (i.e., selective logging) in the baseline scenario. 
• 
Quantify Project Emissions: Provides a detailed procedure to develop conservative 
estimates of net greenhouse gas emissions resulting from changes in carbon stocks in 
the project scenario. 
• 
Quantify Leakage: Describes the approach to account for leakage arising from the 
implementation of project activities. 
• 
Quantify Net Emission Reductions/Removals: Provides the approach to determine the 
amount of net greenhouse gas emission reductions/removals at the end of each year 
for both the baseline and project scenarios. 
• 
Quantify Verified Carbon Units (VCUs): Provides the approach to determine, on the basis 
of the amount of net greenhouse gas emission reductions/removals, and deductions to 
account for risk and uncertainty, the amount of Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) that 
should be credited to the project each year over the project crediting period. 
• 
Perform Ongoing Monitoring: Provides guidelines for the implementation of a 
monitoring plan and identifies monitored parameters to assess carbon stock change 
and disturbance in the project scenario. 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
6