3 
DEFINITIONS 
This 
sub-section 
introduces 
important 
terminology 
to 
ensure 
the 
project 
proponent 
and 
validation/verification bodies (VVBs) share common understandings of the various roles, parties and 
grouping systems involved in this methodology. 
Client Facility 
A large range of small companies or business units that contract 
the Sustainable Community Service Promoter to manage their 
GHG emitting services. Client Facilities may include commercial, 
institutional, residential and industrial buildings/facilities including 
but not limited to warehouses, apartment buildings, hotels, 
restaurants, 
educational 
buildings, 
shopping 
malls, 
food 
manufacturing plants, chemical manufacturing facilities, and light 
industrial plants. Client Facilities are typically located in regional or 
state clusters. 
Sustainable Community 
(SC) 
A Sustainable Community is as a collection of Client Facilities that 
have undertaken common actions (usually initiated by the SCSP) 
to reduce their overall GHG emissions. 
                                                          
2  See VCS Standard for grouped project requirements. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
11 
Sustainable Community 
Service Promoter (SCSP) 
An independent entity, which acts as the project proponent, 
providing essential consultation services in the fields of energy 
and waste to Client Facilities to stimulate greenhouse gas (GHG) 
reduction activities. SCSPs add value to Client Facilities by 
implementing 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology-
enabled electronic tracking platforms, monitoring technologies, 
and emission reduction activities. In providing services to Client 
Facilities, SCSPs contractually maintain ownership of the 
environmental attributes associated with actions that reduce the 
Client Facilities overall GHG emissions. 
Territory 
A grouping of Client Facilities which belong to a common industrial 
or geographic cluster, where the regional conditions (i.e. electricity 
source, climate, waste processing schemes, etc.) and regulations 
(i.e. waste and emission regulations, etc.) are similar for the 
different facilities; where homogeneous emission factors for fossil 
combustibles and identifiable emission factor for the electricity grid 
can be applied; and where common energy efficiency activities 
and waste processing activities are possible. The Territory concept 
has been applied to facilitate VVB sampling procedures, though 
sampling resolutions are ultimately to be determined by the VVB 
based on a risk assessment of the project and project controls. 
This sub-section introduces data, sampling, and conceptual terminologies that are important to how 
emission reductions are quantified and monitored under this methodology. 
Baseline Adjustments 
The non-routine adjustments arising during the monitoring period 
from changes in: 
1) any energy governing characteristic of the facility within the 
measurement boundary, except the named independent variables 
used for routine adjustments (EVO 10000-1, 2010); or 
2) any waste governing characteristic of the facility within the 
measurement boundary (for example, total production). 
Baseline Period 
The period of time chosen to represent operation of the facility or 
system before implementation of an Energy Conservation 
Measure or waste reduction/diversion activities. This period may 
be as short as the time required for an instantaneous 
measurement of a constant quantity, or long enough to reflect one 
full operating cycle of a system or facility with variable operations. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
12 
Confidence Interval 
A confidence interval (CI) is a particular kind of interval estimate of 
a population parameter and is used to indicate the reliability of an 
estimate. It is an observed interval (i.e. it is calculated from the 
observations), in principle different from sample to sample, that 
frequently includes the parameter of interest, if the experiment is 
repeated. How frequently the observed interval contains the 
parameter is determined by the confidence interval or confidence 
coefficient. 
Estimate 
A process of determining a parameter used in a savings 
calculation through methods other than measuring it in the 
baseline and monitoring periods. These methods may be based 
on secondary data or engineering assumptions and estimates 
derived from manufacturer’s rating of equipment performance. 
Equipment performance tests that are not made in the place 
where they are used during the monitoring period shall be 
considered as estimates. 
Facility 
The collection of units, excluding the Project Unit. As such, the 
greenhouse emissions from the facility are defined to remain 
constant as only the Project Unit is impacted by the project. Where 
the Project Unit encompasses the entire site, there may be no 
components defined as the Facility at the site. 
Functional Equivalence 
The project and the baseline shall provide the same function and 
quality of products or services. This type of comparison requires a 
common metric or unit of measurement (such as the mass of 
cardboard diverted from landfill for mass of finished furniture, 
energy use/per unit of product) for comparison between the project 
and baseline activity. 
Information and 
Communication 
Technology (ICT) 
Information and Communication Technology that is applied 
through an electronic tracking platform for each Client Facility. An 
electronic account and the effective electronic link between all 
Client Facilities inside a Territory to stimulate, to support and 
measure their GHG related activities. SCSPs employ an ICT-
enabled GHG monitoring system. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
13 
Measurement Boundary 
A notional boundary drawn around equipment and/or systems to 
segregate those which are relevant to savings determination from 
those which are not. All energy uses of equipment or systems 
within the measurement boundary must be measured or 
estimated, whether the energy uses are within the boundary or not 
(EVO 10000-1, 2010) 
Non-Routine Adjustments 
Calculations that account for changes in Static Factors within the 
measurement boundary since the baseline period. Examples of 
changes in Static Factors that require non-routine adjustments 
include the facility size, product types, building envelope 
characteristics, indoor environment and occupancy characteristics. 
Non-routine adjustments applied to the baseline are sometimes 
referenced as “baseline adjustments” (EVO 10000-11, 2010). For 
this quantification protocol, non-routine adjustments also account 
for changes in the “surplus” characteristics of the project. 
Primary Data 
Observed data from specific facilities linked to the SCSP tracking 
system. 
Project Unit 
A project activity instance wherein the equipment, processes and 
facilities are being serviced and impacted by the energy efficiency 
and waste diversion processing project. The Project Unit must be 
clearly defined and justified by the project proponent. All non-
Project Unit items are covered under the heading of facility 
operation. 
Routine Adjustments 
The calculations made by a formula, as shown in the energy 
efficiency and waste diversion monitoring plans, to account for 
changes 
in 
selected 
independent 
variables 
within 
the 
measurement boundary since the baseline period (EVO 10000-11, 
2010), not including any changes to Static Factors. 
Secondary Data 
Generic- or industry-average data from published sources that are 
representative of Project unit Activities and Client Facility products. 
Static Factors 
Those characteristics of a Client Facility which affect energy use 
and waste volume produced, within the chosen measurement 
boundary. These characteristics include fixed, environmental, 
operational and maintenance characteristics. They may be 
constant or varying (EVO 10000-11, 2010). 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
14 
Standard Deviation 
The standard deviation, denoted by s and is defined as follows: 
 
 
where 
 are the observed values of the sample items 
and   is the mean value of these observations. 
Suggested Sample Size 
While the ultimate level of sampling must be determined by the 
VVB, the project proponent may provide a suggested number of 
Sustainable Community Project Units to be physically verified. 
Unit of Productivity 
The unit of productivity is to be defined by the project proponent as 
a basis for incorporating Functional Equivalence within the 
calculation methodology. Examples of units of productivity could 
be: energy requirements for residential buildings, per square foot 
of front of house commercial space, per kg/L/m2/m3 of output from 
manufacturing facilities, etc. The unit of productivity shall be 
defined to account for any non-production sensitive components. 
In all cases the project proponent must thoroughly justify their 
assessment of the appropriate unit of productivity. 
Verified Data Feedback 
Loop 
After each verification cycle, verified SCSP Client Facility data 
may be used to increase the confidence interval on any estimated 
values included in the baseline or project scenarios. Examples of 
such situations could include replacing regional factors for a 
specific facility with a more accurate waste or energy profile of the 
specific Client Facility based on measured data, providing it can 
still be related to the baseline period. This verified data feedback 
loop could ultimately result in adjustments that both increase or 
decrease emission reduction assertions in future years. The 
adjustments would not be retroactive to previously serialized 
offsets. 
These definitions apply to the energy efficiency components of GHG quantification described herein. 
Adjusted-baseline energy 
The energy use of the baseline period, adjusted to a different set 
of operating conditions (EVO 10000-11, 2010). 
Baseline Energy  
The energy use occurring during the baseline period without 
adjustments (EVO 10000-11, 2010). 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
15 
Cycle 
The period of time between the start of successive similar 
operating modes of a facility or piece of equipment whose energy 
use varies in response to operating procedures or independent 
variables. For example, the cycle of most buildings is 12 months, 
since their energy use responds to outdoor weather which varies 
on an annual basis. Another example is the weekly cycle of an 
industrial process which operates differently on Sundays than 
during the rest of the week (EVO 10000-11, 2010). 
Energy Conservation 
Measure (ECM) 
An activity or set of instances designed to increase the energy 
efficiency of a facility, system or piece of equipment. ECMs may 
also conserve energy without changing efficiency. Several ECMs 
may be carried out in a facility at one time, each with a different 
thrust. An ECM may involve one or more of: physical changes to 
facility equipment, revisions to operating and maintenance 
procedures, software changes, or new means of training or 
managing users of the space or operations and maintenance staff. 
An ECM may be applied as a retrofit to an existing system or 
facility, or as a modification to a design before construction of a 
new system or facility. 
These definitions apply to the waste diversion components of GHG quantification described herein. 
Alternative Processing 
Refers to recycling, reusing, reduction and re-processing activities 
which are applied as part of the project to divert waste from 
reaching a landfill. 
Biodegradability 
Biodegradability is the capability of a substance to break down into 
simpler substances, especially into innocuous products, by the 
actions of living organisms (that is, microorganisms). 
Composting 
The process of collecting, grinding, mixing, piling, and supplying 
sufficient moisture and air to organic materials to speed natural 
decay. The finished product of a composting operation is compost, 
a soil amendment suitable for incorporating into topsoil and for 
growing plants. Compost is different than mulch, which is a 
shredded or chipped organic product placed on top of soil as a 
protective layer. 
Destinations  
The ultimate destination for waste being shipped by the project. 
This is the location where the waste would be unloaded from a 
truck after having been shipped from project Origins.  
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
16 
Disposal 
Final stage in the management of waste, which includes:  
treatment of waste prior to disposal, incineration of waste, with or 
without energy recovery, deposit of waste to land or water, 
discharge of liquid waste to sewer, and permanent, indefinite or 
long term storage of waste. 
Diversion 
For waste measurement purposes, diversion is any combination of 
waste prevention (source reduction), recycling, reuse and 
composting instances that reduces waste disposed at authorized 
landfills and transformation facilities. 
Landfill Gas (LFG) 
Gas generated by biological decomposition of waste material in a 
landfill. The gas is typically comprised of methane, carbon dioxide, 
other trace gases and water vapor. 
Origins  
Starting points for waste being shipped by the project. This is the 
location where the waste would be loaded onto a truck or train for 
ultimate delivery to Destinations.  
Producer  
Refers to the Client Facility that produces the waste to be 
disposed of. 
Process Emissions 
Process emissions are direct emissions from sources directly 
associated with production that involve chemical or physical 
reactions, other than combustion, and where the primary purpose 
of the process is not energy production. 
Recycling 
The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and 
reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, 
and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw 
material for new, reused, or reconstituted products that meet the 
quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
17 
Waste 
All type of wastes, regulated or not regulated, hazardous or non-
hazardous and generated by citizens under the municipal umbrella 
(Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)) or by others sources such as an 
Industrial, Commercial and Institutional (ICI) business unit. This 
definition of the wastes defined by the Basel Convention 
http://www.basel.int/ in the Basel Convention on the Control of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their 
Disposal in the article 2 and referred to Annex I and II, shall apply 
for all types of wastes. Notice this UN international convention 
respect the full right of country to define their wastes (article 2 item 
1). 
Waste Transformation 
Incineration, pyrolysis, distillation, gasification, or biological 
conversion other than composting. 
Waste Management 
All types of waste management operations, disposal and recycling 
applied for all types of wastes shall refer to the definition used by 
the 
Basel 
Convention 
http://www.basel.int/ 
in 
the 
Basel 
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal in article 2 and referred to 
Annex IV. Notice this UN international convention respect the full 
right of country to define their management wastes operations 
(article 2).