74 
CIS 
80 
Europe 
76 
Japan, Australia and New Zealand 
83 
Latin America 
74 
North America 
84 
World (any areas of the world not including the 
locations listed above).  
78 
 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
52 
APPENDIX IV: ADDITIONAL 
INFORMATION ON TESTING AMOUNT 
OF CO2 STORED IN CONCRETE 
 
Concrete is generically comprised of coarse aggregate (stone), fine aggregate (sand), cement, and 
water. The injected CO2 will be mineralized through a chemical reaction with the cement or cement 
replacement.  To quantify the mineralized CO2, project proponents must use carbon analyzers that 
are currently available and common in the industry.   
The operating principle behind a carbon analyzer (often the device is used also to detect sulfur in 
solid materials) involves heating of a sample in oxygen rich environment to oxidize carbon and 
sulfur content of sample material to generate carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide 
respectively. These gases are then passed through detection cells to measure content of carbon 
and sulfur. The measured data are compared with the mass of sample to identify content of 
respective elements in sample. The residual gas is finally discharged out.  The results can be 
compared to the mass of the sample in order to determine a mass percentage of carbon and 
sulphur. Different companies supply these advanced analyzers with an infrared detection system for 
analyzing the percentage of carbon and sulphur in combustion gases. 
According to the companies that manufacture these detectors, carbon content can be measured 
from 0.0001% to 6%.  The device’s software16 displays analytical results in terms of the percentage 
of carbon and sulphur detected.  Carbon content can be determined with a high level of precision in 
a wide range of materials, such as steel, cast iron, alloy, metal ore, ceramics, cement, lime, rubber, 
coal, coke, refractory, carbide, graphite, oil, catalyst, soil and other solid materials. The analyzers 
typically have two options – a resistance furnace and a high frequency induction furnace.  Both 
share the same infrared detection system for analyzing the percentage of carbon in combustion 
gases.   
For each mix design– for both the baseline and the project concrete – the project proponent must  
conduct a minimum of three analyzer tests. Each test must reveal a carbon content that is within 
10% of the other two tests, or the project proponent should continue testing until three results 
within 10% of each other are obtained.  If the project is installed in a new concrete facility, as 
opposed to an existing facility, where baseline concrete was not previously produced, then the 
concrete manufacturer would produce samples NOT using the project equipment and develop 
samples with the equivalent or better  compressive strength or functional equivalence as the post-
project concrete.  Thus, there can be an "apples to apples” comparison. 
The actual test result used in the calculations of quantity of CO2 stored must be the lowest of the 
three samples for the project concrete and highest of the three results for the baseline concrete – 
thus ensuring the most conservative result.  All test procedures and results will be made available 
 
16 See-ELTRA CHS Analyzers 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
53 
to the validation/verification body. The test result is then extrapolated to all of the concrete produced 
for that project design mix in year y as shown in Equations 4a and 4b.  The baseline concrete test 
results are reflected in the variable Cbaseline sample,i,y.  The project concrete test results are reflected in 
the variable Cproject sample,i,y. 
It is recommended that concrete samples should be acquired at the earliest time upon which the 
carbonate reaction is expected to be complete, before the sample sets. If the input sample is fully 
representative of the complete concrete composition, the result can be expressed in a 
straightforward manner as an amount of carbon or CO2 per unit of concrete. The results are 
compared to a baseline carbon content of an equivalent concrete that has not been produced using 
carbon dioxide.    
For example, a concrete sample that is analyzed to have a net increase in carbon of 0.05% by mass 
concrete translates to one cubic meter (m3) of concrete (typically about 2400 kg) contains 1.2 kg of 
carbon. A conversion from carbon to CO2 by multiplying by the ratio of their molar masses (44 for 
CO2, 12 for C) would result in a conclusion of 4.4 kg of CO2 per m3 of concrete.   
If the mineralized CO2 is in low abundance (1% or less by weight of cement) with respect to the 
concrete then project proponents have the option of minimizing the analysis of the components that 
are not reacting with CO2. The sample can be processed to increase the fraction of the cement 
paste fraction by, for example, removing coarse aggregates.  Then the same test can be performed 
on the baseline and post-project materials (in this case without the aggregates that would not react 
with CO2 in the project scenario).   
One percent by weight of cement is around 0.1% by weight of concrete (assuming the concrete is 10% 
by mass cement). Thus, if one starts with concrete then it would be hard to measure the CO2. But if 
one can process the concrete to have a sample that is mostly cement (removing aggregate) then the 
denominator changes and the abundance of what is measured goes up – thus making it easier to 
quantify.   
Sampling in this manner can be done in two states: 1) on fresh concrete, where the mortar (cement 
and sand) is separated from the aggregates; and 2) when the concrete has hardened where a 
sample can be crushed -- as long as the coarse aggregates are not crushed.  The testing procedure 
should be clearly spelled out for the verifier with results made available.  Project proponents may 
want to consider videoing a sample test to make it easier for a verifier to understand the procedure.  
The project proponent should also clearly describe and show calculations for how the test results in 
terms of carbon content of the sample are scaled up to account for this processing step.  
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
54 
APPENDIX V:  DEFAULT FACTOR FOR 
EMISSIONS INTENSITY OF LIQUID CO2 
PROCESSING  
 
As the analysis below shows, the energy required to capture and compress CO2 into a liquid form 
can be generalized.  This default is much more energy-intensive than capturing the gas and putting 
it in a pipeline, so this option would be more conservative if also applied to transporting the CO2 
through a pipeline.   
According to the 2017 US Merchant CO2 Report, the largest source of CO2 is from ethanol plants 
(34%).  Hydrogen refining and ammonia production are also significant sources of CO2 supply.  The 
reference book Industrial Gases Processing provides background on processing industrial gases.17  
The table below indicates the CO2 partial pressures, with ethanol plants being the lowest.  This 
represents the most conservative measure, as explained below. 
  
 
 
 
The figure below indicates the specific power demand (kWh/t liquid CO2) displayed against CO2 
content in the feed gas (mol/mol). The partial pressure of an individual gas is equal to the total 
pressure multiplied by the mole fraction of that gas, so partial pressure and mole fraction are 
proportional. In the figure it is shown that above molar fractions of 0.8 there would be an energy 
requirement of 200 kWh/tonne of liquid CO2.  If a higher pressure is used, then the kWh/tonne 
number would be lower and thus less conservative.  For this reason, the 200 kWh/tonne figure is 
the most conservative.    
 
 
17 H.-W. Häring, ed., Industrial gases processing, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2008.     
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
55 
 
Source: H.-W. Häring, ed., Industrial gases processing, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 
Weinheim, 2008.  
 
 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
56 
APPENDIX VI:  DEFAULT EFFICIENCY OF 
MINERALIZATION  
 
To determine how much carbon dioxide that is introduced is actually mineralized into concrete, a 
detailed technical study was conducted.18  For this study, an industrial carbon dioxide utilization 
technology (CarbonCure) was installed at a ready-mix concrete producer. The work considered the 
impact on 12 months of operation both in terms of the carbon dioxide converted during the concrete 
production and to determine environmental impact of the technology and the avoided cement.     
The carbon quantification involves three steps: sample collection and drying, separation, and carbon 
analysis. A sample of freshly produced masonry concrete was collected from the production line and 
dried with a hot plate. The sample was then sieved through an 80 μm sieve to both provide a 
homogeneous sample for analysis as well as to increase the proportion of cement in the sample being 
analyzed. The cement is the only reactive component in the concrete mixture; minimizing or excluding 
the aggregates increases the signal in the subsequent measurement. The total carbon and sulphur 
contents of the sieved fines were then measured using an Eltra CS-800 carbon and sulphur analyzer. 
Any changes in total carbon relative to control samples were assumed to be a product of the 
introduction of CO2 as all other variables were fixed. 
Eight batches were produced with a CO2 addition and compared to a historical data set comprising 
nine batches (produced across seven different days).  The average conversion was 93%. This is 
attributable to random variations in sample proportions following drying and sieving of the concrete 
and potentially an inherent heterogeneity of the fly ash. On average, the replicate CO2 measurements 
had an average precision ±20% bwc.  The conversion rate in the environmental calculations was 
assumed to be 93%. With 9.4 tons (8.5 tonnes) of CO2 utilized during the year production there were 
8.7 tons (7.9 tonnes) mineralized through conversion to calcium carbonate.  
For the purposes of this methodology, while the actual average conversion rate was quite high (93% 
of the introduced CO2 was actually absorbed, there are scientific uncertainties and thus the default 
efficiency for CO2 mineralization into the concrete will be set to a much lower level of 60%.   
Although the technical study entails ready-mix concrete only, as a conservative measure, the resulting 
default mineralization efficiency value is applicable to both ready-mix and pre-cast concrete products. 
 
 
 
 
18 S. Monkman, Sustainable Ready Mixed Concrete Production Using Waste CO2: A Case Study, in: SP-
330 Proceedings Fourteenth International Conference: Recent Advances in Concrete Technology and 
Sustainability Issues, American Concrete Institute, Beijing, China, 2018: pp. 163–174.  See 
https://www.concrete.org/store/productdetail.aspx?ItemID=SP330. 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
57 
APPENDIX VII: RELATIONSHIP TO 
APPROVED OR PENDING 
METHODOLOGIES 
 
Approved and pending methodologies under the VCS Program and approved GHG programs which fall 
under the same sectoral scope were reviewed to determine whether an existing methodology could be 
reasonably revised to meet the objective of the proposed methodology. Five methodologies were 
identified under the same sectoral scope. Two were outside the scope, including VM0040 (sectoral 
scope 3) and AM0027 (sectoral scope 5). These are all set out in Table 2. No other similar 
methodologies under Verra or any other approved GHG program are applicable to project activities 
which capture and use greenhouse gases to produce concrete, and thus no existing methodology can 
be reasonably revised to meet the objective of this methodology.  
Table 2: Similar Methodologies 
Methodology Title 
GHG 
Program 
Comments 
VM0030 
Methodology for 
Pavement Application 
using Sulphur 
Substitute, v1.0 
VCS 
Not applicable to project activities that utilize 
captured CO2 to manufacture concrete.  This 
methodology uses sulphur substitute.  
VM0031 
Methodology for Precast 
Concrete Production 
using Sulphur 
Substitute, v1.0  
VCS 
Not applicable to project activities that utilize 
captured CO2 to manufacture concrete.  This 
methodology uses sulphur substitute. 
However, this methodology accepts the 
general premise that less cement production 
means lower emissions, an important concept 
for this proposed methodology. 
VM0040 
Methodology for 
Greenhouse Gas 
Capture and Utilization 
in Plastic Materials 
VCS 
Not applicable to project activities that utilize 
captured CO2 to manufacture concrete.  This 
methodology focuses only on plastic polymers. 
AM0027 
Substitution of CO2 from 
fossil or mineral origin 
by CO2 from renewable 
sources in the 
production of inorganic 
compounds 
CDM 
Applicable only to projects that produce 
inorganic compounds where fossil or mineral 
sources of CO2 are presently used as an input 
and where renewable sources of CO2 are 
available as a substitute input in the project 
activity case.  The initial project for this 
methodology produced sodium and 
ammonium bicarbonates in a process that 
was integrated into a renewable biomass 
plant. The processing of biomass and the 
renewable energy component are specifically 
listed in the applicability criteria, which is not 
the case with the proposed methodology. In 
addition, the sodium bicarbonate may not be 
permanently sequestered, which is a 
requirement for this proposed methodology. 
AMS-III.BA 
Recovery and recycling 
of materials from E-
Waste  
CDM 
Provides precedent for determining emission 
reductions from the displacement of 
production of conventional materials. 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
58 
ACM0015 
Emission reductions 
from raw material switch 
in clinker production 
CDM 
Not applicable to project activities that utilize 
captured CO2 to manufacture concrete. 
However, this methodology deals with 
reducing cement content and adding other 
materials, such as fly-ash. It should also be 
noted that the use of supplemental 
cementitious materials (SCM) that can 
generate credits in other offset protocols 
cannot count towards carbon credits in this 
proposed protocol. 
ACM0005 
Increasing the Blend in 
Cement Production 
CDM 
Applicable to projects that use increased 
amounts of blended materials such as slag 
and coal ash.  Not applicable to project 
activities that utilize captured CO2 to 
manufacture concrete.   
 
 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1