5 
PROJECT BOUNDARY 
5.1 
Spatial Project Boundaries: 
The project boundary is to be defined by the project proponent with maps and legal land descriptions.  Such 
properties may be contiguous or separate properties if they are located within a similar region and forest condition.   
Note that all spatially relevant forest land holdings owned or managed by the project proponent will need to be 
considered in leakage assessments and monitoring, even if they are not included in the defined project area.   
5.2 
Temporal Project Boundaries 
As per VCS requirements for AFOLU projects, project proponents must specify a project-crediting period as set out 
in the most recent version of the VCS Standard.  .   
5.3 
Leakage Assessment Boundaries 
Leakage within this methodology is assessed against a national leakage area.   
5.4 
Selected Carbon Pools and Emissions Sources: 
Table 1 - Selection of Carbon Pools 
Carbon Pool 
Selected? 
Justification/Explanation 
Aboveground Tree 
Biomass 
Yes 
Required by VCS.  Major carbon pool subject to changes from the 
baseline to the project scenario. 
Aboveground Non-
tree Biomass 
No 
Excluded by VCS.  Minor carbon pool subject to changes from the 
baseline to the project scenario 
Belowground 
Biomass Pool 
Yes 
Required by VCS. Major carbon pool subject to changes from the 
baseline to the project scenario.  
                                              
2 This methodology does not provide specific equations and methods for calculating net emissions related to activity shifting leakage.  VCS 
requires “IFM project developers must demonstrate that there is no leakage within their operations – i.e., on other lands they manage/operate 
outside the bounds of the VCS carbon project” (Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2008a); and the methodology requires monitoring and reporting on 
evidence demonstrating no activity shifting is occurring in order to demonstrate compliance with VCS.  If, during the project duration, activity 
shifting is found to be occurring, project should to refer the latest VCS AFOLU requirements.     
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
7 
Dead Wood Pool 
Yes 
Required by VCS.  Minor carbon pool subject to changes from the 
baseline to the project scenario.   
Litter Pool 
No 
Excluded by VCS for AFOLU projects.  Minor carbon pool – generally 
considered as a transitional pool only.   
Soil Carbon Pool 
No 
Optional in VCS AFOLU IFM projects, but excluded in this methodology.  
As a conservative approach, changes to soil carbon from harvesting are 
assumed to be de minimis.   
Wood Products 
Pool 
Yes 
Required by VCS.  All baseline scenarios involve logging. 
 
Table 2 - Emissions Sources Included/Excluded from the Project Boundary 
Emissions 
Sources 
Gas 
Selected? Justification/Explanation 
Use of Fertilizers 
CO2 
CH4 
N2O 
No 
No 
No 
Non-de minimis use of fertilizer in the project scenario is excluded.  
In the baseline scenario, fertilizer emissions are deemed 
insignificant, as per the VCS May 24th, 2010 AFOLU Program 
Update (Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2010c).   
These exclusions are conservative, and do not increase the 
emission reductions. 
Combustion of 
Fossil Fuels by 
Vehicles / 
Equipment 
CO2 
CH4 
N2O 
Optional3 
No 
No 
Carbon emissions from harvesting equipment, log transport, and 
primary forest product manufacturing are included.   
CH4 and N2O emissions from equipment are assumed to be de 
minimis.  
The exclusion of these combustion gases does not increase the 
emissions reductions in the project.  
Burning of 
Biomass (on site 
slash burning) 
CO2 
CH4 
N2O 
No 
No 
No 
However, carbon stock decreases due to biomass burning are 
accounted as a carbon stock change.   
These exclusion assumptions do not increase the emission 
reductions in the project.   
6 
PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINING THE BASELINE SCENARIO:  
This methodology utilizes a project-based baseline scenario approach.   
                                              
3 Project developer may choose to exclude this pool is it can be demonstrated that it is conservative with respect to the impact on GHG 
emission reductions generated.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
8 
The flow of GHG emissions over the project duration is based on the creation and projection of a reasonable, 
credible, and conservative baseline harvesting scenario in the absence of the carbon project.  The most plausible 
baseline scenario is selected from a comparative assessment of the project and the baseline alternatives, 
including “at a minimum, a comparative assessment of the implementation barriers and net benefits faced by the 
project and its alternatives” (Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2008d).   
This methodology will employ a 3 step process to select a most likely baseline, and is required to be consistent 
with the assessment and determination of additionality in Section 74:   
STEP 1 – Identify Plausible Alternative Baseline Scenarios to the VCS Project Activity 
Project proponents must identify and document descriptions, rationale, and information sources for multiple (at 
minimum 3) realistic and credible property forest management scenarios that would have potentially occurred 
within the proposed project boundary in the absence of the carbon project activity.   
The possible baseline scenarios to be evaluated must include, at minimum: 
1. 
Historical Practice Baseline Scenarios:  continuation of pre-project historical activity baseline or 
management plans; 
2. 
Common Practice Baseline Scenarios:  activity on the project area which could have been performed 
without the carbon project, based on evidence of comparable forest management for similar property types 
and situations in the region5; 
All identified baseline scenarios must, at a minimum: 
1. 
Comply with IFM-LtPF project and eligibility requirements by only including activities and areas where 
forests remain forests; 
2. 
Comply with legal requirements for forest management and land use in the area, “unless verifiable 
evidence can be provided demonstrating that common practice in the area does not adhere to such 
requirements” (Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2008d)6; 
3. Demonstrate that the “projected baseline scenario environmental practices equal or exceed those 
commonly considered a minimum standard among landowners in the area” (Voluntary Carbon Standard, 
2008d).   
Realistic and credible baseline scenarios must be based on verifiable information sources such as local or regional 
land, harvest, or inventory records, observable comparable regional property evidence, formal property appraisals, 
financial modeling compared against typical published regional industry market return rate targets, regional 
stakeholder feedback, accredited or certified professionals (i.e. registered professional foresters, etc.) within the 
regional relevant industry, and other reasonable information sources provided in a manner consistent with typical 
regional considerations and practices.   
                                              
4 Although only required as part of the Additionality assessment, project proponents may find utilizing the Tool for the Demonstration and 
Assessment of Additionality in VCS AFOLU Project Activities (VCS, 2010b) to be useful for additional guidance for identifying and selecting 
baseline scenarios.   
5 Also considering the financial drivers for management activities based on verifiable market-based financial return expectations of typical 
market property owners and investors (i.e., IRR, NPV, cost of capital hurdle rates, etc. for data comparisons with available market financial 
information).   
6 Note that VCS further states: “if it can be shown that these activities result from laws, statutes, regulatory frameworks or policies implemented 
since 11 November 2001 that give comparative advantage to less emissions-intensive technologies or activities relative to more emissions-
intensive technologies or activities they need not be taken into account and the baseline scenario could refer to a hypothetical baseline rate of 
avoided emissions or sequestration without the national and/or sectoral laws, statutes, regulatory frameworks or policies being in place.” 
(Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2008d). 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
9 
Project proponents may utilize tools such as the Investment Analysis (Step 2) and Barrier Analysis (Step 3) of the 
latest approved version of the VCS Tool for Demonstration and Assessment of Additionality as an initial filter to 
exclude project scenarios which are financially infeasible or face clear barriers to implementation.   
The remaining baseline scenarios are then further evaluated to select the most likely baseline scenario, as follows.   
STEP 2 – Selection of a Single Baseline Scenario for the Project 
Project proponents must select a single baseline scenario for the project using the following steps:   
STEP 2a - The Historical Baseline Scenario – based on historical operating practices on the property: 
The baseline scenario based on actual property harvest history must be selected if: 
2a.1 
The project proponent has at least 5 years historical harvest level data history7. 
 
All other cases will utilize the Common Practice Baseline Scenario Selection steps below: 
STEP 2b - The Common Practice Baseline Scenario – based on previous owner activities: 
2b.1 
If the current project proponent has owned the property for less than five years then the project 
proponent may:   
i. 
Choose to use the previous managers historical activities or management plan as representative 
of common practice, in which case the baseline scenario is selected based on the process and 
criteria in Step 2a; or, 
ii. 
Choose to select the baseline scenario based on common practice and investment analysis of 
scenarios as outlined in Step 2c below. 
STEP 2c - The Common Practice Baseline Scenario – based on common practice activities: 
For recent or pending changes in project property management without historical data (> 5 years) (or otherwise not 
selecting a historical baseline scenario as per Step 2b), the project proponent will select the baseline scenario(s) 
based on an assessment of regional common practice8 supported by a financial analysis for achieving typical 
market returns from forest products.   
The project proponent must select the baseline scenario that: 
2c.1 
Generates the most financial attractive return on investment from forest product returns using the 
assessment process outlined in Step 2 Option II and/or Option III in the most recent version of the 
VCS Tool for the Demonstration and Assessment of Additionality in VCS AFOLU Project Activities; 
and, 
2c.2 
Can be demonstrated to be regionally common practice and locally operationally implementable, 
including:   
a. Compliant with the legally required land use and forest management practices in a manner 
consistent with VCS requirements (see Step 1);  
                                              
7 For convenience, projects may utilize a pre-existing forward-looking forest management plan as the historical baseline data, if this 
management plan can be demonstrated to be consistent with the historical practices and rates, and representative of a forward projection of 
historical harvest practices.   
8 VCS currently defines common practice as:  “Extrapolation of observed similar activities in the geographical area with similar socio-economic 
and ecological conditions as the project area occurring in the period beginning ten years prior to the project start date” (VCS, 2010b). 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
10 
b. Consistent with local market capacity for the baseline scenario activities and products (i.e. log 
markets, contractor capacity, etc.);  
c. Consistent with observable and verifiable9 regional operational practices, including, at minimum:  
i. Harvest types (i.e. clearcut, selective cut, etc.),  
ii. Logging and hauling equipment types and capabilities,  
iii. Annual harvest levels (i.e. m3/year, ha/year), 
iv. Average minimum harvest age, tree size, and/or stand volume,  
v. Average minimum economic viability (or decision criteria) by stand type,  
vi. Average minimum log utilization specifications (on average based on size and/or species), 
and waste/breakage assumptions,  
vii. Average tree retention practices, including hydro-riparian buffers, wildlife trees, and other 
single or grouped merchantable and un-merchantable tree retention,  
viii. Maximum harvest slope or other operability constraints which would limit regional logging 
equipment,  
ix. Reforestation and stand management practices; and 
d. Operationally feasible on the project area using local harvesting and hauling technology, local 
infrastructure, etc. 10.   
Project proponents must provide a description of the selected baseline scenario and related scenario modeling 
assumptions which justifies and provides supporting evidence that the baseline scenario selected under STEP 2c 
reflects a credible assessment of typical common practice for similar conditions, as listed above.   
STEP 3 – Additionality Test 
Project proponents must further ensure the selected most plausible baseline scenario is consistent with the 
outcome of the additionality assessment of this scenario made under Section 7 in this methodology.