6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
6.1 
Selection of baseline 
The project proponent must use the most recent version of the VCS tool, VT0001 Tool for the 
Demonstration and Assessment of Additionality in AFOLU Project Activities to assess which of 
the baseline alternatives must be excluded from further consideration. 
As per the applicability conditions of this methodology, the project must demonstrate a baseline 
scenario of planned timber harvest (see Box 1 below). If such a baseline cannot be 
demonstrated, then this methodology cannot be applied. 
Planned timber harvest events in the baseline scenario can occur in any year of the project 
activity, not just year zero (0). 
6.2 
Modeling the baseline scenario 
Once the baseline scenario of planned timber harvest is demonstrated, the project proponent 
must determine how to model the baseline management scenario. A Historical Baseline 
Scenario (Section 6.2.1) must be used where data is available, otherwise a Common Practice 
Baseline Scenario (Section 6.2.2) must be used. 
Irrespective of which baseline scenario is used, the same formulas (as set out in Sections 8.1.1 
to 8.1.6) for the quantification of baseline emissions are applied. The major difference between 
the historical and common practice baseline scenarios is the source of data for the majority of 
parameters (see Section 9.1) that are used in Sections 8.1.1 to 8.1.6 to calculate baseline 
emissions.  
Where the historical baseline scenario is applied, the historical data pathway must be followed 
regarding data sources for most parameters available at validation. 
Where the common practice scenario is applied, the common practice data pathway must be 
followed regarding data sources for most parameters available at validation. 
In principle, under the historical baseline scenario, historical records of timber harvesting from 
the baseline agent are used to determine the values of many of the parameters available at 
validation. Under the common practice scenario, other sources (e.g., data from other forestry 
companies in the region, regional default values, legal requirements, etc.) must be used. See 
Sections 8 and 9.1 for further details. 
6.2.1 Historical Baseline Scenario 
A baseline scenario and timber harvest plan (see  
Box 1 below) derived from the historical practices of the baseline agent of timber harvest must 
be modelled as the baseline if the following documents exist for the project proponent: 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
14 
1) Historical records of forest management exist for a minimum of 5 or more years 
preceding the project start date. 
2) Historical records indicating that the management practices have surpassed the legal 
requirements (provided by conforming to all local and regional forest legislation). 
3) Historical records indicating that the historical management surpasses financial 
barriers by providing above average financial returns. 
6.2.2 Common Practice Baseline Scenario 
All other cases must model baseline harvest based on common practice. 
Common practice is defined as timber harvest under the legal requirements for forest 
management and will be determined from a timber harvest plan (see Box 1 below) developed 
from: 
1) The project area through scenario modeling as if the legal requirements were 
implemented in the project area; and 
2) A reference area6 (or multiple reference areas) already under timber harvest 
management that complies with legal requirements for forest management and 
selected to be representative of local common practice for timber harvest. 
 
Box 1: Timber Harvest Plan 
The description of harvesting in the form of a timber harvest plan constitutes the basis of the 
baseline scenario for greenhouse gas accounting.  The timber harvest plan describes the 
harvest of timber products and must: 
1) Reference the forest volume inventory (see Section 8.1.1– parameter Vj,i|BSL) to 
identify the relative number of trees per hectare potentially available for harvest by 
species in each stratum; 
2) Demarcate all non-harvest areas within the forest based on legally required 
exclusions for environmental features such as slope, swamp areas or conservation 
buffers; 
3) Divide the harvestable forest into annual operating areas (referred to throughout 
this methodology as land parcels) using common practice; 
4) Include a design and presentation of the forestry infrastructure to harvest, skid/haul, 
store and move harvested timber products from the land parcels to downstream 
 
6 Reference areas must be in the same region as the project area and must match the project area in terms of forest 
types, climate and elevation (identical mix of forest types ±20%; identical annual precipitation ±20%; elevation classes 
(500 m classes) in the reference region shall be in the same proportion as in the project area (+/-20%)). For forest types, 
a de minimis rule may be applied if not suitable reference area can be found. Forest types that cover less than 1% of 
the project area may be excluded for the purpose of finding a suitable reference area. However, in total, no more than 
5% of the project area forest cover may be excluded in this way. 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
15 
processing or market entry points. Where the project proponent accounts for 
emissions from forestry infrastructure, the design and presentation must include all 
forest roads, skidtrails and log landings that would be established under the baseline 
scenario as a georeferenced layer (shapefile or equivalent) and must list necessary 
harvest and transport machinery; 
5) The timber harvest plan must follow local best practice for timber harvest, including 
planning of roads, skidtrails and log landings-and the timber resource volume and 
extraction quotas defined by any legal requirements. 
For the purpose of estimating the net annual changes in carbon stocks resulting from 
planned timber harvest in the baseline scenario, a detailed planned timber harvesting 
schedule will be developed from the timber harvest plan, setting out details of harvest and 
forestry infrastructure establishment for each land parcel in the project area in terms of the 
following: 
1) The species to be harvested. 
2) The year (1,2,3...) in which timber harvest and/or forestry infrastructure 
establishment in each land parcel is scheduled to occur. 
3) The number of years each land parcel is in a post-harvest and/or post forestry 
infrastructure establishment state during the project crediting period. 
4) The maximum and minimum diameters at breast height (DBH), at stump and at top 
for tree harvesting.   
5) The planned harvesting regime (i.e., number of log landings, species/stratum- 
and area subject to selective logging). 
6) The fraction of merchantable timber volume from clearing of forest roads, skidtrails 
and log landings that is to be processed into wood products (FV,INF,HWP). Based on this 
fraction, as well as forest inventory and forestry infrastructure data, VEX,INF,j,i|BSL and 
VnotEX,INF,j,i|BSL (see points 2 and 3 below) will be calculated. 
7) The technical specifications for the categories of wood products to be harvested. 
8) The total volumes or fractions to be harvested, broken down by categories of wood 
products defined as sawnwood, wood-based panels, other industrial roundwood, 
paper and paper board, and/or others. 
The planned timber harvest schedule is determined ex ante to reflect the timber harvesting 
plan as stipulated by the legal right to harvest. The planned timber harvesting schedule will 
be developed for the project area to include all land parcels within the project boundary for 
the proposed IFM activity. 
The output of the timber harvest plan and timber harvesting schedule must include: 
1) The mean extracted volume of extracted merchantable timber per unit area by 
species in each stratum in each year (VEX,j,i|BSL). 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
16 
2) Where the project proponent accounts for forestry infrastructure, the mean volume of 
merchantable timber extracted for wood processing that is harvested during the 
process of forestry infrastructure establishment per unit area by species in each 
stratum in each year (VEX,INF,j,i|BSL). 
3) Where the project proponent accounts for forestry infrastructure, the mean volume of 
merchantable timber that is cleared during the process of forestry infrastructure 
establishment and NOT extracted for wood processing per unit area by species in 
each stratum in each year (VnotEX,INF,j,i|BSL). 
The planned timber harvesting schedule will be submitted by the project proponent as part of 
the project documents. 
6.3 
Stratification 
If the proposed project area contains different forest types or forests with different carbon 
densities, stratification must be carried out to improve the accuracy and precision of carbon 
stock estimates. 
For estimation of base year carbon stocks, strata must be defined based on parameters that are 
key variables in any method used to estimate changes in the managed forest carbon stocks. 
Strata will include either forest type, vegetation type and/or target timber species. 
Based on the availability of data about the nature and composition of forest stocks in the project 
area, stratification will be developed based on either: 
a) Existing vegetation mapping or stratification, where these are documented in the legal 
right to harvest; or 
b) Estimates developed from sampling the project area using standard forest assessment 
protocols specific to the forest region where the project area is located. 
Baseline stratification is developed ex ante. 
As part of the project documents, the project proponent must submit a detailed description of 
the stratification adopted for the project area.