6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
6.1 
Determination of the Most Plausible Baseline Scenario 
Determination of the most plausible baseline scenario builds on the outcome of the 
additionality analysis (Section 7) and must be consistent with the description of conditions prior 
to the project start date. VT0001 must be used to assess the project additionality. The stepwise 
approach below must be followed in addition to VT0001 to determine the most plausible 
baseline scenario.   
Step A: Reuse the plausible alternative land use scenarios to the REDD project activity that 
have been listed as an outcome of Sub-step 1b of the additionality tool VT0001.   
Unless it has been demonstrated that any of these land use scenarios are not credible or do 
not comply with all mandatory applicable legislation and regulations as required by VT0001 
Sub-step 1b, the list of plausible alternative land use scenarios must include at least:  
1) Continuation of the pre-project land use;  
2) Project activity performed on the land within the project boundary without being 
registered as a VCS REDD project; and  
3) Activities similar to the proposed project activity on at least part of the land within the 
project boundary of the proposed REDD project.  
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
27 
Step B(1): Where the VT0001 barrier analysis is used to demonstrate additionality, apply the 
decision tree in Figure 4 to the list of all alternative land use scenarios from Step 1 that are not 
prevented by any barrier.   
Figure 4: Barrier Analysis Decision Tree 
 
Step B(2): Where the VT0001 investment analysis is used to demonstrate additionality, and if at 
least one land use scenario generates financial benefits other than carbon revenues, select the 
baseline scenario as below:   
1) Where VT0001 Option I is used, the baseline scenario is the land use scenario with the 
lowest costs over the crediting period). Option I may only be applied where the 
alternative scenarios do not include revenues.   
2) Where VT0001 Option II is used, the baseline scenario is the most economically or 
financially attractive land use scenario (i.e., the scenario with the most favorable 
financial indicator such as internal rate of return).  
3) Where VT0001 Option III is used and none of the alternative land use scenarios have a 
financial indicator that meets the benchmark, the baseline scenario is the continuation 
of the pre-project land use. Where Option III is used and at least one of the land use 
scenarios has a financial indicator that meets the benchmark, the baseline scenario is 
the scenario that has the most favorable financial indicator (e.g., internal rate of return, 
net present value or cost-benefit ratio).  
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
28 
Step C: Where barrier analysis is used to demonstrate additionality but does not allow 
determination of the baseline scenario, implement one of the following:  
1) An investment analysis following VT0001 Option II (regardless of whether it has been 
used to demonstrate additionality). Select the most plausible baseline as specified in 
Step B(2) above; or  
2) Through qualitative analysis, estimate the baseline GHG emissions for each alternative 
land use scenario that is not prevented by any barrier. The baseline scenario is the land 
use scenario that allows for the lowest baseline GHG emissions. Estimates must be 
based on publicly available default factors and standards, such as the IPCC 2006 
Guidelines for National GHG Inventories and its 2019 Refinements or the IPCC 2003 
Good Practice Guidelines for LULUCF. All other data used must be publicly available and 
must come from recognized, credible sources, such as peer-reviewed literature.    
Quantification of GHG emissions under the selected baseline scenario must follow the 
applicable and relevant activity-type module(s).  
6.2 
Description of Baseline Scenario (Step 2): Analysis of Agents, Drivers 
and Underlying Causes of Deforestation and Their Likely Future 
Development 
Once the most plausible baseline scenario is determined, it must be described through a 
detailed analysis of the agents, proximate causes, drivers and underlying causes of 
deforestation.10 
Understanding “who” is deforesting and what drives their decision is necessary to understand 
the risk of activity-shifting leakage and to design effective measures to address deforestation. 
The analysis of agents and drivers of deforestation is also key to estimate the quantity and 
location of future deforestation. For example, the analysis must be referenced when selecting 
the approach to project future deforestation quantity (Section 8.1.3.1) and the variables to be 
included in the spatialization model (Section 8.1.3.20). 
The analysis described in this section must be summarized in the PD.  
The baseline scenario description must be supported by evidence such as existing studies, 
maps (including the jurisdictional forest cover benchmark map (FCBM) and risk map), expert 
consultations, field surveys (such as participatory rural appraisal) and other verifiable sources 
of information.  
Notwithstanding other rules and requirements, the most plausible baseline scenario described 
in this section must at minimum be consistent with and referred to when describing the 
 
10 See Angelsen and Kaimowitz (1999) and Chomitz et al. (2006) for comprehensive analysis of deforestation agents 
and drivers. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
29 
conditions prior to project initiation, identifying the stakeholders to be engaged and consulted, 
delineating the reference region (Section 5.1.1), selecting carbon pools and estimating the 
post-deforestation carbon stocks (Sections 5.3, 5.4 and 8.1.5), delineating the leakage belt 
(Section 5.1.3), quantifying the risk of leakage (Section 8.3), estimating ex ante project 
effectiveness at reducing deforestation (Section 8.2.1.1) and assessing the non-permanence 
internal and external risks following the most recent version of the VCS AFOLU Non-
Permanence Risk Tool.  
6.2.1 Identification of Deforestation Agents 
Identify the main groups of deforestation agents (e.g., farmers, ranchers, loggers) and their 
relative importance (i.e., the amount of historical LU/LC change that may be attributed to each). 
Use existing studies, the maps prepared in Step 3 (Section 8.1.1.4), expert consultations, field-
surveys and other verifiable sources of information, as needed. 
It may be possible to determine the relative importance of each agent from the LU/LC change 
matrix developed in Section 8.1.1.4, since each agent usually converts forests for a specific 
purpose (e.g., cattle ranching, cash-crop production, subsistence farming). 
Where the relative importance of different agents is spatially correlated (e.g., small farmers are 
concentrated in hill areas and ranchers on plains), it may be useful to stratify the reference 
region, the project area and the leakage belt accordingly (in IRR strata), and to continue the 
baseline assessment for each stratum i separately in order to increase projection accuracy. 
For each identified agent group, provide the following information: 
1) Name of the main agent group or agent; 
2) Brief description of the main social, economic, cultural and other relevant features of 
each main agent group. Limit the description to aspects that are relevant to understand 
why the agent group deforested the reference region during the historical reference 
period and why it is expected to deforest the project area during the baseline validity 
period; 
3) Brief assessment of the most likely changes in population size of the identified main 
agent groups in the reference region, project area and leakage belt; 
4) Statistics on historical deforestation attributable to each main agent group in the 
reference region, project area and leakage belt. 
6.2.2 Identification of Deforestation Drivers 
For each identified agent group, analyze factors that drive their land use decisions. The goal is 
to identify the immediate causes of deforestation. 
Two sets of driver variables must be distinguished: 
1) Driver variables explaining the quantity (hectares) of deforestation (to be used in 
Sections 8.1.3.1 and 8.1.3.20, as appropriate), such as: 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
30 
a) Prices of agricultural products; 
b) Costs of agricultural inputs; 
c) Population density; and 
d) Rural wages. 
2) Driver variables explaining the location of deforestation, also called “predisposing 
factors” (de Jong 2007; to be used in Section 8.1.3.20), such as: 
a) Access to forests (such as vicinity to existing roads, railroads, navigable rivers 
and coastal lines); 
b) Slope; 
c) Proximity to markets; 
d) Proximity to existing or industrial facilities (e.g., sawmills, pulp and paper mills, 
agricultural products processing facilities); 
e) Proximity to forest edges; 
f) Proximity to existing settlements; 
g) Spatial variables indicating availability within the forest of land with good 
ecological conditions to expand agricultural activities, such as soil fertility and 
rainfall; and 
h) Management category of the land (e.g., national park, indigenous reserve). 
For each of these two sets of variables: 
3) List the one to five key driver variables and provide any relevant source of information 
that provides evidence that each of the identified variables has been a driver of 
deforestation in the reference region during the historical reference period and is 
expected to be a driver of deforestation in the project area during the baseline validity 
period. 
4) Briefly describe for each main agent group identified in Section 6.2.1 how the key 
driver variables have and will most likely impact each agent group’s decision to 
deforest. 
5) For each identified key driver variable, provide information about its likely future 
development by providing any relevant source of information. 
6) For each identified driver variable, briefly describe the project measures that will be 
implemented to address them,11 where applicable. 
6.2.3 Identification of Underlying Causes of Deforestation 
The agents’ characteristics and decisions are themselves determined by broader forces, the 
underlying causes of deforestation, such as: 
a) Land-use policies and their enforcement; 
b) Population pressure; 
 
11 This does not apply to spatial variables such as slope and elevation. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
31 
c) Poverty and wealth; 
d) War and other types of conflicts; and 
e) Property regime. 
1) List the one to five key underlying causes and cite any relevant source of information 
that provides evidence that the identified variables have been an underlying cause of 
deforestation during the historical reference period. 
2) Briefly describe how each key underlying cause has determined and will most likely 
determine the key drivers identified in Section 6.2.2 and the decisions of the main 
agent groups identified in Section 6.2.1. 
3) For each identified key underlying cause, provide information about its likely future 
development by citing any relevant source of information. 
4) For each identified underlying cause, describe the project measures that will be 
implemented to address them, where applicable.  
6.2.4 Analysis of Chain of Events Leading to Deforestation 
Based on the historical evidence collected, analyze the relationships between the main agent 
groups, key drivers and underlying causes and explain the sequence of events that has typically 
led to deforestation in the reference region during the historical reference period and will likely 
lead to future deforestation in the project area during the baseline validity period. Consult local 
experts, literature and other sources of information as necessary. Briefly summarize the results 
of this analysis in the PD. 
6.2.5 Conclusion 
The analysis of agents and drivers of deforestation must conclude with a statement about 
whether the evidence available about the most likely future deforestation trend in the reference 
region and project area is inconclusive or conclusive.   
“Conclusive” evidence in this methodology means that the hypothesized relationships between 
agent groups, driver variables, underlying causes and historical levels of deforestation are 
verifiable through statistical tests, desk studies or other verifiable sources of information, such 
as documented information provided by local experts, communities, deforestation agents and 
other groups with good knowledge about the project area and the reference region. 
Where multiple agents and drivers are present, the evidence obtained for each must be 
“conclusive” to allow a “conclusive” decision overall. 
Where the evidence is conclusive, describe the most plausible baseline scenario and state 
whether the weight of the available evidence suggests that the overall trend in future baseline 
deforestation rates will be decreasing, approximately constant or increasing. 
Use the outcome of the analysis to select the approach to project future deforestation quantity 
(Section 8.1.3). 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
32 
Where the evidence is inconclusive and the historical deforestation trend is decreasing or 
roughly constant, additional analysis must be carried out such as more literature reviews, 
expert consultations and additional field surveys, until conclusive evidence on the most likely 
future deforestation trend is found. Where the historical deforestation trend is increasing and 
the evidence is inconclusive, the deforestation rate used in the projections must be the average 
historical rate (see Section 8.1.3.1). Alternatively, additional analysis may be carried out until 
conclusive evidence is found. 
Where different strata have been considered in the analysis, a conclusion and statement of 
trend must be provided for each stratum. For a conservative baseline projection, the project 
proponent must consider that the agents and drivers of deforestation are realistic and 
conservative in all scenarios, based on published and reliable data, and consistent with existing 
on-the-ground actions and enforced laws aimed at avoiding deforestation, such as effective 
surveillance and law enforcement.  
6.3 
Revisiting Baseline Projections for Future Baseline Validity Period 
Regardless of the approach chosen to establish them, baselines must be revisited over time 
because agents, drivers and underlying causes of deforestation change dynamically. Frequent 
and unpredictable updating of the baseline may create serious market uncertainties. Therefore, 
the baseline must be revisited as set out in the most recent version of the VCS Standard. 
Where an applicable sub-national or national jurisdictional baseline becomes available, 
baselines may be reassessed earlier in accordance. Tasks involved in reassessing the baseline 
are: 
1) Update information on agents, drivers and underlying causes of deforestation (Section 
6.3.1). 
2) Adjust the land use and land cover change component of the baseline (Section 6.3.2). 
3) Adjust, as needed, the carbon component of the baseline (Section 6.3.3). 
6.3.1 Update Information on Agents, Drivers and Underlying Causes of Deforestation 
Information on agents, drivers and underlying causes of deforestation in the reference region 
must be collected periodically, as these are essential for improving future deforestation 
projections and the design of the project activity. 
1) Collect information that is relevant to understand deforestation agents, drivers and 
underlying causes. 
2) Redo Step 2 (Section 6.2) at the beginning of each baseline validity period. 
3) Where a spatial model was used to locate future deforestation, new data on the spatial 
driver variables used to model the deforestation risk must be collected as they become 
available. These must be used to create updated spatial datasets and new “Factor 
Maps” for the subsequent baseline validity period. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
33 
6.3.2 Adjust the Land Use and Land Cover Change Component of the Baseline 
6.3.2.1 Adjustment of Annual Areas of Baseline Deforestation 
At the end of each baseline validity period, the projected annual areas of baseline deforestation 
for the reference region must be reassessed and eventually adjusted for the subsequent 
baseline validity period. The adjusted baseline rates must be submitted to a VVB.  
Adjustments must be made using the processes described in this methodology and the data 
obtained from monitoring LU/LC changes in the reference region during the previous baseline 
validity period, updated information on deforestation agents, drivers and underlying cases of 
deforestation and, where applicable, any updated information on the variables included in the 
estimation of the projected areas of baseline deforestation. For this assessment, the historic 
reference period is extended to include the original reference period and all subsequent 
monitoring periods up to the beginning of the current monitoring period. 
6.3.2.2 Adjustment of Projected Baseline Deforestation Location 
Using the adjusted projections for annual areas of baseline deforestation and any improved 
spatial data for the creation of factor maps included in the spatial model, the location of 
projected baseline deforestation must be reassessed using the methods explained in this 
methodology.  
All areas credited for avoided deforestation in past baseline validity periods must be excluded 
from the reassessed baseline projections as these areas must not be credited again. To 
perform this exclusion, use the map of “cumulative areas credited” that was updated in all 
previous verification events. 
Note – where the boundary of the leakage belt area was assessed using Eq. (1) or any other 
spatial model, the boundary of the leakage belt must be reassessed at the end of each 
baseline validity period using the same methodological approaches as in the first period. This 
is required until monitoring of leakage becomes unnecessary.12 
6.3.3 Adjustment of the Carbon Component of the Baseline 
Adjusting the carbon component of the baseline is not necessary in most cases (see Sections 
8.2.2.3 and 8.2.2.4 for more detailed guidance). However, improved carbon stock data are 
likely to become available over time and must be used when reassessing baseline projections. 
Methods to measure and estimate carbon stocks are described in Appendix 3. 
 
12 Monitoring of leakage becomes obsolete at the date on which another VCS or UNFCCC registered (and VCS-endorsed) 
program is monitoring, reporting, verifying and accounting emissions from deforestation in a broader area 
encompassing the project area. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
34