8 QUANTIFICATION OF ESTIMATED GHG 
EMISSION REDUCTIONS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
8.1.1 Analysis of Historical Land Use and Land Cover Change (Step 3) 
The goal of this step is to collect and analyze spatial data in order to identify current land use 
and land cover conditions and to analyze LU/LC change during the historical reference period 
within the reference region. 
8.1.1.1 Collection of Suitable Data 
Collect the data that will be used to analyze land use and land cover change in the reference 
region during the historical reference period. It is good practice to do this for at least three time 
points, about three to five years apart. For areas covered by intact forests, it is sufficient to 
collect data for one single date, which must be as close as possible to the project start date (≤2 
years). 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
35 
As a minimum requirement: 
1) Collect medium resolution spatial data13 (from 30 m × 30 m up to a maximum of 
100 m × 100 m resolution) from optical and non-optical sensor systems, such as but 
not limited to Landsat,14 Sentinel, SPOT and ASTER data covering the past 10 years. 
2) Collect high resolution data from remote sensors (<5 × 5 m pixels) and/or from direct 
field observations for ground-truth validation of the posterior analysis. Describe the 
type of data, coordinates and sampling design used. 
3) In Table 4, provide the following information about the data collected. 
Table 4: Data Used for Historical LU/LC Change Analysis 
Vector 
(satellite 
or 
airplane) 
Sensor 
Resolution 
Coverage 
Acquisition 
date 
Scene or point identifier 
Spatial 
Spectral 
(km2) 
(DD/MM/YY) 
Path / 
Latitude 
Row / 
Longitude 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Where already interpreted data of adequate spatial and temporal resolution are available, 
these may also be considered for posterior analysis, with some caution.15 Where data about 
historical LU/LC and/or LU/LC change are already available, information about the minimum 
mapping unit, the methods used to produce these data and descriptions of the LU/LC classes 
and/or LU/LC change categories must be compiled, including on how these align with IPCC 
classes and categories. 
 
13 Guidance on the selection of data sources (such as remotely sensed data) may be found in Chapter 3A.2.4 of the 
2019 Refinement to the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Vol. 4, and in the latest 
version of the GOFC-GOLD REDD Sourcebook. 
14 On 31 May 2003, the scan-line-corrector aboard Landsat 7 failed, producing horizontal zero-filled wedges in 22 
percent of scenes from that point on. The nadir portion of full scene images is usually intact, though both east and west 
of nadir gaps extend to the scene edges. Gap-filling functions have been created, but algorithmic mechanisms that blur, 
average or otherwise change spatial relationships between pixels spanning these gaps to existing pixels in the scene 
being filled are unsatisfactory from the perspective of the spatial modeling needs of REDD. Instead, users should fill in 
these gaps post-processing with spatially and spectrally satisfactory classifications from other sources (such as other 
complimentary optical and radar platforms). 
15 Existing maps should be used with caution because they often do not report documentation, error estimates, whether 
they are specifically of the site or region in question or extracted from a national map and whether they were obtained 
by change detection techniques rather than by static map comparison.  
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
36 
8.1.1.2 Definition of Classes of Land Use and Land Cover 
Identify and describe the land use and land cover (LU/LC) classes present in the reference 
region at the project start date. An LU/LC class is a unique condition of land use or land cover 
for which: 
a) The boundary may be defined based on remotely sensed data and information, such as 
maps of vegetation, soil, elevation and management category, as defined by the project 
proponent to unambiguously define an LU/LC class; and 
b) Carbon stocks per hectare (t CO2e/ha) are relatively homogeneous across the 
landscape. Carbon stocks must only be estimated for classes inside the project area, 
leakage belt and leakage management zones, as described in Step 6 (Section 8.1.5). 
The following criteria must be used to define LU/LC classes: 
1) The minimum classes must be “Forest Land” and “Non-Forest Land.” 
2) “Forest land” will in most cases encompass strata with different carbon stocks. Forest 
land must therefore be further stratified in forest classes with different average carbon 
densities. 
3) “Non-Forest Land” may be further stratified in different non-forest classes. See the 
2019 Refinement to the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories, Vol. 4, Chapter 3, Section 3.2, for a description of potential non-forest land 
classes (cropland, grassland, wetlands, settlements and other land). Where appropriate 
to improve the accuracy of carbon stock estimates, classes in addition to those used in 
national GHG inventories may be defined. 
4) The description of an LU/LC class must include criteria and thresholds that enable 
discrimination between classes. Select criteria and thresholds that allow a precise 
delineation of the LU/LC polygons of each class. Such criteria may include spectral 
definitions and other criteria such as elevation, slope, aspect, soil type, distance to 
roads16 and vegetation type. Where needed, in the “Description” column of Table 5, 
refer to more detailed descriptions in the methodological annex to be prepared 
according to Section 8.1.2.1. 
5) For all forest classes present in the project area, specify whether logging for timber, 
fuel-wood collection or charcoal production occur in the baseline case. Where different 
combinations of forest class and baseline activities are present in the project area, 
define different classes for each combination, even where carbon densities are similar 
at the project start date. 
 
16 Some classes may be defined using indirect criteria (e.g., “Intact old-growth forest” = Forest at more than 500 m from 
the nearest road; “Degraded forest” = Forest within 500 m of the nearest road. In this example, an assumption is made 
that logging activities usually do not occur, or are of very low intensity, where the trees are more than 500 m from the 
nearest road). The use of indirect criteria must be briefly justified in the PD based on verifiable information, such as 
independent studies and literature. Using the definition of “degraded forest” from this example, the boundary of the 
polygon class “degraded forest” would be a function of how the road network develops over time, which implies that 
such development must be monitored. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
37 
6) Where a forest class has predictably growing carbon density (i.e., is a secondary forest) 
and is located both in the project area and leakage belt, two different classes must be 
defined (see Section 8.1.5.1 for explanations). 
7) In most cases, one single Land Use and Land Cover Map representing the spatial 
distribution of forest classes at the project start date will be sufficient. However, where 
certain areas of land are expected to undergo significant changes in carbon density 
due to growth or degradation in the baseline case, a sequence of Land Use and Land 
Cover Maps representing the mosaic of forest classes in each future year may be 
generated.  
8) The generation of such a sequence of maps is mandatory only for areas within the 
project boundary that are undergoing degradation in the baseline case (i.e., categories 
C, D, E and/or F are present in the project area; see Table 1 and Appendix 1).  
9) Any assumption of change in carbon densities in the baseline case must be 
documented using credible and verifiable sources of information, such as 
measurements in plots representing a chrono-sequence, published literature and other 
sources, as appropriate. 
10) List the resulting final LU/LC classes in Table 5. 
Table 5: List of All Land Use and Land Cover Classes Existing at the Project Start Date in the 
Reference Region 
Class Identifier 
Trend in 
Carbon 
Density 
Presence 
In 
Baseline 
Activity 
Description   
(including criteria for unambiguous 
boundary definition) 
IDcl 
Name 
LG 
FW 
CP 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
… 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Cl 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
TABLE NOTES 
IDcl 
Class identifier 
Response options for 
Trend in Carbon Density 
Note whether decreasing, constant or increasing. See Section 0 for a 
definition of carbon density 
Response options for 
Presence In 
RR = Reference region, LK = Leakage belt, LM = Leakage management 
zones, PA = Project area 
LG 
Logging 
FW 
Fuelwood collection 
 
VM0015, v1.2