2 
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Project method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project method 
The methodology is designed to quantify the GHG reductions achieved by a range of project 
activities including improved forest management, reforestation and avoided conversion activities 
implemented in forests in Canada. The approach included in the methodology to quantify carbon 
in forest carbon pools is based on the extensive scientific knowledge base which exists regarding 
the dynamics of Canadian forest at the provincial level. This methodology specifically allows 
users to select appropriate models and sampling protocols from a suite of well-established 
models and monitoring methods covering the full range of forest activities and forest carbon pools 
in the provinces of British Columbia (BC) and Quebec (QC). These models and protocols are well 
calibrated for the range of forest ecosystems in these respective provinces, and are consistent 
with national and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) standards.   
Project proponents developing projects in other provinces of Canada must select appropriate 
models and sampling protocols and demonstrate that they are well-calibrated for the range of 
forest ecosystem of the relevant province, as well as to demonstrate their consistency with 
national and IPCC standards10. 
 
8 For more information, see http://forestcarbonstandards.org/home.html  
9 IPCC,  2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, Volume 4, Chapter 4: Forest Land, 2006 
10 Any alternative model must meet the following minimum requirements: 
• The model is scientifically sound, and has been peer reviewed in a process that: (i) primarily involved 
reviewers with the necessary technical expertise (e.g., modeling specialists and relevant fields of 
biology, forestry, ecology, etc.), and (ii) was open and rigorous; 
• The model is based on empirical evidence, and has been parameterized and validated for the general 
conditions of the project land area; 
• Application of the model is limited to the scope for which the model was developed and evaluated; 
• The model’s scope of application, assumptions, known equations, data sets, factors or parameters, 
etc., are clearly documented; 
• The models must provide accurate modelling of time dependent parameters such as decay, below 
ground biomass and soil carbon changes, etc.  The model must not assume that such changes take 
place instantaneously or within a short period of time.  
In addition alternative models must consider the requirements set out in the VCS Methodology 
Requirements, v4.0. 
 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 6 
A wide range of practices and technologies are available for use in forest projects. This 
methodology will not attempt to describe them here or restrict the applicability of the methodology 
to specific practices or technologies. Instead, project proponents must clearly describe their 
project and associated practices and technologies in a project description. 
The steps to be undertaken in developing a project under this methodology are: 
1. Determination of methodology applicability. 
2. Determination of project eligibility under the VCS Standard. 
3. Identification of the project boundary, including both the geographic boundary, and the 
carbon pools and emission sources to be accounted. 
4. Determination of the baseline scenario for the project. 
5. Determination of whether the project meets the relevant criteria for the determination of 
additionality. 
6. Ex-ante estimation of the changes in carbon pools and GHG emissions under the 
baseline scenario. Because the methodology requires updating of baselines for some 
project categories, the ex-ante baseline estimates may or may not be updated ex-post 
prior to later verification events. 
7. Ex-ante estimation of the changes in carbon pools and GHG emissions under the project 
scenario. Updating of the project estimates will be undertaken on an ex-post basis prior 
to later verification events. 
8. Ex-ante estimation of emissions due to leakage. 
9. Summation of the estimated GHG benefits of the project. 
10. Preparation of a monitoring plan. 
2.1  
GHG(s) Included in Methodology 
This methodology focuses on enhancing sequestration of carbon dioxide by forests, reducing 
carbon dioxide emissions from forests and forestry operations, and maintaining or increasing 
stores of carbon in forest and wood product carbon pools.  Depending on project-specific 
circumstances, comparatively small changes (either increases or decreases) in the emissions of 
methane and nitrous oxide may also be realized. GHG sources are described in Table 1 below. 
Table 1: GHG Sources included in this Methodology 
GHG 
Source/Sink 
Included? 
Explanation 
CO2 
  
  
Forest biomass 
(living and dead) 
Yes 
Primary sink/source in the target project 
activities 
Soil carbon 
Yes 
Potential sink/source in many project activities 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 7 
  
Harvested wood 
products 
Yes 
Potential sink/source in many project activities 
Fossil fuel 
combustion 
Yes 
Changes in emissions typically associated with 
changes in management 
CH4 
  
  
Biomass 
combustion 
Conditionally 
Where biomass burning occurs in the baseline 
or project scenarios 
Anaerobic 
decomposition 
Conditionally 
Where anaerobic decomposition occurs as part 
of the harvested wood product cycle 
Fossil fuel 
combustion 
Yes 
Changes in emissions typically associated with 
changes in management 
N2O 
  
  
Biomass 
combustion 
Conditionally 
Where biomass burning occurs in the baseline 
or project scenarios 
Fertilizers 
Conditionally 
Where changes in nitrogen fertilizer use occur 
between the baseline and project scenarios 
Fossil fuel 
combustion 
Yes 
Changes in emissions typically associated with 
changes in management 
2.3  
Methodology Flexibility 
This methodology is applicable to a wide range of forest carbon projects. To facilitate this, the 
following general flexibility mechanisms are included, with more detail on each provided in 
appropriate sections of this methodology: 
• 
Specific project activities. A wide range of project activities are permitted, as long as 
they fall within the general eligible project type categories described in this methodology. 
• 
Baseline scenario selection approach. For some project activities, flexibility is given in 
the methodology with respect to the approach used to identify the baseline scenario. 
• 
Exclusion of sources, sinks and pools (SSPs). Where justified based on project and 
baseline-specific details, project proponents may exclude some additional SSPs from 
quantification beyond those excluded by default in the methodology. This would include 
SSPs that are not present in the project and baseline for the specific project, emission 
sources where project emissions are less than baseline emissions (this is a requirement 
for related emission sources), or SSPs that can be demonstrated to be de minimis. 
• 
Forest carbon quantification approaches. This methodology allows project proponents 
to choose appropriate forest carbon pool inventory, modeling, and/or other related 
approaches from the options given, subject to meeting the requirements stipulated in this 
methodology.   
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 8 
• 
Emission source quantification methods. For some emission sources, more than one 
option is provided for quantification, with project proponents being free to choose the 
method most suited to available data. 
• 
Project-specific emission factors and assumptions. Where justified, appropriately 
documented, and permitted by the quantification methodologies provided in this 
methodology, project-specific emission factors and assumptions may be used instead of 
default references sources and/or factors noted in the methodology. 
• 
Assessing leakage. Various options are presented for project proponents to address 
activity shifting and/or market leakage, as appropriate, for their projects. 
• 
Project-specific monitoring approaches. To account for the wide variety of potential 
project applications, project-specific monitoring approaches may be used if justified and if 
they conform to the general requirements stipulated in the methodology. 
• 
Project-specific data quality management approaches. To account for the wide 
variety of potential project applications, project-specific data quality management 
approaches are to be developed.  This methodology does not prescribe specific data 
quality management approaches that must be followed. 
• 
Managing risk of reversal. Project proponents are able to develop their own detailed 
approach to assessing and managing reversal risks, subject to the general requirements 
stipulated in this methodology. 
 
 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 9