10 REFERENCES 
Alengebawy, A., B. A. Mohamed, Y. Ran, et al. 2022. “A comparative environmental life cycle 
assessment of rice straw-based bioenergy projects in China.” Environmental Research 212 (D): 
113404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.113404. 
Cochran, W. G. 1977. Sampling Techniques. 3rd ed. Wiley. 
IEA. 2004. Energy Statistics Manual. International Energy Agency. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-statistics-manual-2 
IPCC. 2000. Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry. Prepared by R. T. Watson, I. R. Noble, B. 
Bolin, N. H. Ravindranath, D. J. Verardo, and D. J. Dokken, eds. Cambridge University Press.  
IPCC. 2003. Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry. Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies. 
IPCC. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [T. F. 
Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and 
P.M. Midgley, eds.]. Cambridge University Press. 
IPCC. 2019. 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories. Institute for Global Environmental Strategies. 
Maillard, E., and D. A. Angers. 2014. “Animal manure application and soil organic carbon 
stocks: A meta-analysis.” Global Change Biology 20 (2): 666–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12438. 
Mengchen, L., F. Wang, Y. Liu, et al. 2024. “Hanyou 3015: A water-saving and drought-
resistance rice cultivar for dry cultivation in southern China.” Crop Breeding and Applied 
Biotechnology 24 (1): e463524110. https://doi.org/10.1590/1984-70332024v24n1c10 
Minamikawa, K., T. Tokida, S. Sudo, A. Padre, and K. Yagi. 2015. Guidelines for Measuring CH4 
and N2O Emissions from Rice Paddies by a Manually Operated Closed Chamber Method. 
National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences, Japan. 
https://www.naro.affrc.go.jp/archive/niaes/techdoc/mirsa_guidelines.pdf 
Minamikawa, K., T. Yamaguchi, T. Tokida, S. Sudo, and K. Yagi. 2018. Handbook of Monitoring, 
Reporting, and Verification for a Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Project with Water Management in 
Irrigated Rice Paddies. Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences, NARO, Japan. 
Mutters, R., C. Greer, K. M. Klonsky, and P. Livingston. 2007. Sample Costs to Produce Rice. 
Sacramento Valley Rice Only Rotation. University of California Cooperative Extension. RI-SV-07. 
https://coststudyfiles.ucdavis.edu/uploads/cs_public/ae/59/ae59d1a4-72f4-4388-8667-
46dd1f026fcf/ricesv07.pdf 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
73 
Sander, B. O., and R. Wassmann. 2014. “Common practices for manual greenhouse gas 
sampling in rice production: A literature study on sampling modalities of the closed chamber 
method.” Greenhouse Gas Measurement and Management 4 (1): 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/20430779.2014.892807  
Shang, X., S. Song, and J. Yang. 2020. “Comparative environmental evaluation of straw 
resources by LCA in China.” Advances in Materials Science and Engineering 2020: 4781805. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4781805 
Som, R. K. 1995. Practical Sampling Techniques. 2nd ed. CRC Press.  
Tiwari, R., K. Kritee, T. K. Adhya, et al. 2015. “Sampling guidelines and analytical optimization 
for direct greenhouse gas emissions from tropical rice and upland cropping systems.” Carbon 
Management 6 (3–4): 169–84. https://doi.org/10.1080/17583004.2015.1082233 
US EPA. 2021. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2019. 
https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-sinks-1990-
2019 
Wang, F., Y. Liu, A. Zhang, et al. 2022. “Breeding an early maturing, blast resistance water-
saving and drought-resistance rice (WDR) cultivar using marker-assisted selection coupled with 
rapid generation advance.” Molecular Breeding 42 (8): 46. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032-
022-01319-3 
 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
74 
APPENDIX 1: STRATIFICATION OF THE 
PROJECT AREA AND ESTABLISHMENT OF 
QUANTIFICATION UNITS 
Stratification of the project area is required to group fields into quantification units with homogenous 
cultivation patterns; each group is a stratum. The characterization of cultivation patterns must contain 
data on the parameters set out in Table 5. Under Quantification Approach 2, project proponents must 
also identify sites used as control sites (e.g., baseline control site and sample units) for gas chamber 
measurements in situ. 
The stratification of the project area must follow the steps below. 
Step 1: Characterization of cultivation pattern(s) in the baseline scenario 
Gather data on historical practices for each field included in the project for all mandatory parameters 
listed in Table 5. The data collected to establish the schedule of activities (see Section 6, Table 3) 
should fulfill most of these data needs. However, the project proponent must collect data on any 
additional parameters listed in Table 5 that are not included in the schedule of activities to ensure a 
complete set of mandatory parameters (and optional parameters, where selected).  
Step 2: Characterization of cultivation pattern(s) in the project scenario 
Describe all planned project activities for each field included in the project for all mandatory 
parameters listed (and optional parameters, where selected) in Table 5. 
Step 3: Identification of strata 
Group project fields based on homogeneous cultivation patterns; each group is a stratum.   
For the purposes of determining baseline scenario and project activity emission factors, project 
proponents must define representative fields from which data must be used for quantification of 
reductions (Section 8). 
Table 5. Guidance for the identification of cultivation patterns for stratification of the project 
area 
Parameter 
Type 
Category 
Optional/Mandatory 
for Stratification 
Water regime – 
on-season 
Dynamic1 
Continuously flooded 
Mandatory 
Single drainage 
Multiple drainages 
Dynamic 
Flooded 
Mandatory 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
75 
Parameter 
Type 
Category 
Optional/Mandatory 
for Stratification 
Water regime – 
pre-season 
Short drainage (<180 days) 
Long drainage (>180 days) 
Organic 
amendment 
(application rate)2 
Dynamic 
No organic amendment  
Mandatory 
Low, medium, to high organic amendment  
Organic 
amendment 
(type)3 
Dynamic 
Straw on-season (mulch) 
Mandatory 
Green manure 
Straw off-season 
Farmyard manure  
Compost 
No organic amendment (only low volume of rice 
stubble is left after harvesting or straw is burned) 
Biochar4 
Dynamic 
Any volumes of biochar added to soils where rice 
is cultivated in the project 
Mandatory 
Methanotrophs4 
Dynamic 
Any volumes of methanotrophs added to soils 
where rice is cultivated in the project 
Mandatory 
Cultivation period 
Dynamic 
Cultivar-dependent 
Mandatory 
Nitrogen fertilizer 
application 
Dynamic 
<100 kg N/ha 
100–200 kg N/ha 
200–300 kg N/ha 
>300 kg N/ha 
Mandatory/Optional5  
Soil pH 
Static6 
<4.5 
Optional 
4.5–5.5 
>5.5 
Soil texture 
Static 
Average soil texture within a stratum must be in 
the same FAO soil textural class7 
Optional 
Soil organic 
carbon 
Static 
<1% 
Optional 
1–3% 
>3% 
Climate 
Static 
Agro-ecological zone 
Optional 
1: Dynamic conditions are subject to changes over time whether due to management or other reasons (e.g., climatic 
conditions such as droughts events).  
2: Where different rates of organic amendments are applied, project proponents must take the most conservative 
approach to quantifying GHG emissions (e.g., taking field CH4 measurements for calculating the total GHG balance 
under QA2 at the field that receives the higher application rate). 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
76 
3: Where the project includes two or more types of organic amendment and/or application rates for straw 
amendment, a single stratum may be set based on the most conservative organic amendment (i.e., the lowest 
organic amendment rate) instead of setting multiple strata. 
4: Where any biochar or methanotrophs are added to rice farms in the project, such application must be taken into 
account when stratifying for QA2. 
5: Where a project activity involves changes in nitrogen management, nitrogen fertilizer application is a mandatory 
parameter for stratification. Otherwise, N application rate is an optional parameter for stratification.  
6: Static conditions are site-specific parameters less prone to changes over time and thus initially must be determined 
only once for a project and the corresponding fields (i.e., for baseline assessment).  
7: See Annex 4 in the FAO World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2014, available at: 
https://www.fao.org/3/i3794en/I3794en.pdf  
 
 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
77
APPENDIX 2: GUIDELINES FOR FIELD 
MEASUREMENTS UNDER 
QUANTIFICATION APPROACH 2 
Direct measurements must be taken annually and at every cultivation period when applying 
Quantification Approach 2. Calculation of emission factors must be seasonally integrated (see Section 
8.2.4).  
A detailed measurement plan must be developed that includes at least the following elements:  
1) Detailed description of the process adopted for stratification of the project area (see guidance 
in Appendix 1) 
2) Description of the planned sampling approach and schedule for field chamber measurements 
including logistics necessary to transport the gas samples from the field to the laboratory 
3) Description of the laboratory gas analysis (i.e., gas chromatography) technique, equipment, and 
schedule 
4) Cropping calendar reference information for selection of the measurement sites at which gas 
chamber measurements will take place  
The project proponent must ensure that the sampling and analysis protocol is optimized for rice 
systems, including any necessary adjustments (e.g., corrections for interferences due to air moisture 
and ambient concentrations of the tested gases). Project proponents must report minimum detection 
levels and ensure that standard gas mixtures used to calibrate/validate equipment span the detected 
concentration ranges.  
Methane measurements must be taken at sites that represent the cultivation pattern of the baseline 
scenario (i.e., baseline control sites) and project activity (i.e., sample units). A project must have at least 
three baseline control sites and three sample units per stratum. For each sample point, either a 
separate chamber must be used, or chambers may be moved around between sample points for each 
measurement event. For each gas chamber, three samples at three time intervals (e.g., t0, t15’, t30’) 
must be taken per measurement event (i.e., three samples from each chamber, at each sample point). 
Therefore, a project employing a single stratum with a single consistent deployment of practices (e.g., 
AWD is implemented across the entire project and all fields have the same historic cultivation pattern 
representing the baseline scenario) would have a minimum of 18 gas samples taken per measurement 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
78 
event: nine gas samples from three measurement sites representing the project activity and nine gas 
samples from three measurement sites representing the baseline scenario.33 
The implementation of direct measurements must involve suitably qualified and experienced staff, 
which may include third parties (e.g., independent consultants, members of research institutions) 
and/or qualified staff of the project itself, to design and implement the direct measurement campaign. 
The guidelines in this appendix do not replace the expertise required in implementing direct 
measurements using gas chambers.34 Instead, it provides minimum requirements and additional 
recommendations. 
Table 6 details the options for gas chamber equipment and Table 7 details the sampling requirements 
for field measurements. Records must be kept demonstrating the timing of each sample and the 
relevant management practices being deployed in each sample location. All sampling activities must be 
carried out by individuals with suitable training and experience in undertaking such sampling.  
Table 6. Technical options for gas chamber design 
Feature 
Conditions 
Chamber 
material 
Option 1: Non-transparent 
• 
Commercially available polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) containers or manufactured 
chambers (e.g., using galvanized iron) 
• 
Painted white or covered with reflective 
material (to prevent increasing inside 
temperature) 
• 
Only suitable for short-term exposure 
(typically 30 min) followed by immediate 
removal from the field 
Option 2: Transparent 
• 
Manufactured chambers using acrylic 
glass 
• 
Can be placed for longer time spans in 
the field where equipped with a lid that 
remains open between measurements 
and is only closed during 
measurements 
Placement in 
soil 
Option 1: Fixed base 
• 
Base made of non-corrosive material and 
remains in the field for the whole season 
• 
Base should allow tight sealing of the 
chamber 
• 
Base should have bores in the 
submerged section to allow water 
exchange between inside and outside 
Option 2: Without base 
• 
Chambers must be placed on the soil 
with open lid to allow escape of 
eventual ebullition 
 
33 Minamikawa et al. (2015, p. 8) 
34 Expert guidance on gas sampling can be found in peer-reviewed literature, including Minamikawa et al. (2015, 2018) 
and Tiwari et al. (2015) and online at US ARS GraceNet Sampling Protocol 
https://www.ars.usda.gov/anrds/gracenet/gracenet-protocols/ and IRRI 
https://ghgmitigation.irri.org/resources/guidelines/measurements-approaches/manual-chamber-method 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
79 
Feature 
Conditions 
• 
Base should be installed at least 24 
hours before the first sampling 
Auxiliaries of 
chamber 
• 
Thermometer for measuring the temperature inside the chamber 
• 
Fan (battery-operated) inside the chamber for mixing air inside the chamber during 
sampling 
• 
Sampling port (rubber stopper placed in a bore of the chamber) 
Basal area 
Rectangular or rounded, but has to cover minimum of four rice hills (approximately 0.1 m² 
minimum) 
Height 
Option 1: Fixed height 
• 
Total height (protruding base + chamber) 
should exceed plant height 
Option 2: Flexible height 
• 
Adjustable to plant height 
• 
Chambers with different heights or 
modular design 
Table 7. Summary of field direct measurement requirements 
Element 
Requirement 
Sample points per strata 
Baseline emissions: at least three 
Project emissions: at least three 
Number of gas samples per chamber 
At least three per exposure  
Measurement duration (exposure 
time) 
Sample within 30 minutes of placing the top of the chamber onto the 
frame in the ground 
Sample time of day 
Between 09:00 am and 12:00 pm 
All samples in the given strata must be sampled within three hours of 
the first sample being taken.  
CH4 sampling frequency 
Minimum requirement: once per week, during cultivation period 
Duration of CH4 sampling regime 
Commencing at first flooding, continuing until the first significant fallow 
for each cultivation period 
Gas sample collection or temporary 
storage using syringe 
Suitability test (leakproof) before measurement 
Preferably equipped with a lock (two- or three-way) for ease of handling 
Sample storage until analysis 
Storage <24 h: air samples may remain in syringe 
Storage >24 h: transfer air samples into evacuated vial, store with 
slight overpressure 
Table 8 details the requirements for laboratory gas analysis. Gas analysis must be undertaken by a 
qualified laboratory using commercial equipment, by individuals with suitable training and experience 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
80 
in undertaking such analysis.35 The vials containing the gas sample must be transferred to the 
laboratory for analysis as soon as possible after each sampling event. The procedures for handling 
vials, from initial sampling through until the gas analysis is complete, must be documented and 
reported. All gas analysis equipment must be maintained and calibrated per the manufacturer's 
specifications and calibrated before every analysis using certified standard gases.36 
Table 8. Summary of laboratory analysis requirements 
Feature 
Conditions 
Method 
Gas chromatograph with flame ionization detector (FID) 
Injection 
Direct injection or with multi-port valve and sample loop 
Column 
Packed (e.g., molecular sieve) or capillary column 
Calibration 
With certified standard gas each day of analysis before and after the 
analyses are completed 
Accreditation 
Where possible, the selected analytical laboratory should be ISO/IEC 
17025 accredited.37 
 
 
 
 
35 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Volume 4, Chapter 5, Box 
5.2A (New) 
36 Ibid.  
37 The selection of an analytical laboratory should be based on its listing as an approved analytical service provider of 
environmental greenhouse gas (e.g., CH4) measurements according to national and/or international 
standards/accreditation. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
81
APPENDIX 3: N2O CORRECTION FACTOR 
All fields that employ changes in irrigation (from continuous flooding to single or multiple drainage) 
must account for N2O emissions associated with such changes by applying an N2O correction factor 
(CFN2O: 0.00314 kg N2O/kg N), irrespective of whether there are any changes in rates of N fertilizer 
applied. The N2O correction factor has been derived from the emission factors for flooded rice fields 
(EF1FR) Table 11.1 (Updated) in Chapter 11, Volume 4 of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The difference between the aggregated default 
value emission factors for continuously flooded rice fields (0.004 kg N2O/kg N) and rice fields with 
single or multiple drainages (0.005 kg N2O/kg N) was converted from N2O-N into N2O emissions using 
the emissions factor for N2O-N to N2O. Table 9 demonstrates the values used in the calculation and the 
approach. All emission factor values in the table below are taken from Table 11.1 (Updated) in Chapter 
11, Volume 4 of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories.  
Table 9. Values used in calculation of the N2O correction factor (adapted from IPCC 2019) 
Emission Factor (EF) 
Aggregated 
Disaggregated 
Default 
Value 
Uncertainty 
Range 
Disaggregation 
Default 
Value 
Uncertainty Range 
EF1 for N additions from 
synthetic fertilizers, organic 
amendments, and crop 
residues, and N 
mineralized from mineral 
soil as a result of loss of 
soil carbon (kg N2O-N/kg N) 
0.01 
0.002–
0.018 
Synthetic 
fertilizer inputs1 
in wet climates 
0.016 
0.013–0.019 
Other N inputs2 
in wet climates  
0.006 
0.001–0.011 
All N inputs in 
dry climates  
0.005 
0.000–0.011 
EF1FR for flooded rice fields3 
(kg N2O-N/kg N) 
0.004 
0.000–
0.029 
Continuous 
flooding  
0.003 
0.000–0.010 
Single and 
multiple 
drainage  
0.005 
0.000–0.016 
EF3PRP,CPP for cattle (dairy, 
non-dairy, and buffalo), 
poultry, and pigs (kg N2O-
N/kg N) 
0.004 
0.000–
0.014 
Wet climates  
0.006 
0.000–0.027 
Dry climates  
0.002 
0.000–0.007 
EF3PRP,SO for sheep and 
“other animals” (kg N2O-
N/kg N) 
0.003 
0.000–
0.010 
- 
- 
- 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
82 
Disaggregation of EF1 and EF3PRP,CPP by climate (based on long-term averages): Wet climates occur in temperate and 
boreal zones where the ratio of annual precipitation to potential evapotranspiration is greater than 1, and tropical 
zones where annual precipitation is greater than 1000 mm. Dry climates occur in temperate and boreal zones where 
the ratio of annual precipitation to potential evapotranspiration is less than 1, and tropical zones where annual 
precipitation is less than 1000 mm. Figure 3A.5.1 in Chapter 3, Vol. 4 in IPCC (2019) provides a map subdividing wet 
and dry climates based on these criteria. In wet climates, EF1 is further disaggregated by synthetic fertilizer N inputs 
and other N inputs. 
1: This emission factor should be used for synthetic fertilizer applications and fertilizer mixtures that include both 
synthetic and organic forms of N.  
2:  Other N input refers to organic amendments, animal manures (e.g., slurries, digested manures), N in crop 
residues, and mineralized N from soil organic matter decomposition.  
3: Disaggregation of EF1FR: Single and multiple drainage also includes alternate wetting and drying. Disaggregated 
EF1FR for rain-fed and deep-water systems is not provided due to lack of data.  
EF1: Uncertainty range of disaggregated EF1 based on the 95% confidence interval of fitted values. Uncertainty range 
of aggregated EF1 is based on the 2.5th to 97.5th percentile of the dataset.  
EF1FR, EF3PRP,CPP, and EF3PRP,SO: Uncertainty ranges are based on the 2.5th to 97.5th percentile. 
For EF2, see guidance in 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: 
Wetlands, Chapter 2, Table 2.5.  
 
 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
83 
APPENDIX 4: GUIDANCE FOR DIGITAL 
MONITORING, REPORTING, AND 
VERIFICATION (DMRV) 
Under this methodology, project proponents are encouraged to employ digital monitoring, reporting, and 
verification (DMRV) tools, in particular remote sensing, to efficiently enable third-party validation and 
verification of project data. This appendix provides guidance with respect to best practices for using 
DMRV for projects developed under this methodology.  
Table 10. Guidance for quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) best practices for use of 
DMRV 
DMRV Type 
Issue 
Guidance 
Example Use 
Remote 
sensing (RS) 
Temporal/spatial 
resolution 
Consider setting a minimum 
spatial and temporal resolution, 
differentiated based on the 
intended use. 
A project proponent uses RS to detect 
irrigation events. The project proponent 
ensures satellite image frequency is 
high enough to capture the typical 
and/or expected dry period duration for 
project farmers. The project proponent 
employs the use of satellite imagery 
with 2–4-day frequency around 
expected irrigation events, as they know 
that the farmers typically dry their fields 
for 4–5 days. 
Bands/types of 
data 
Consider setting requirements for 
bands and types of data, 
differentiated based on intended 
use. 
A project proponent uses radar to detect 
moisture levels in the soil. The project 
proponent deploys different 
wavelengths depending on seasonal 
timing. This ensures that as the crop 
matures and the canopy closes over the 
ground, obstructing view of the soil, the 
wavelength chosen for latter parts of the 
season can penetrate the canopy and 
effectively determine soil moisture.  
Correction 
Remote sensing data should be 
corrected to surface reflectance 
units (atmospheric correction) and 
filtered for clouds and cloud 
shadows. Consider limiting the 
amount of correction that may be 
applied to a single scene.  
A project proponent uses three separate 
satellite datasets. For one drying event 
on a specific field, the satellite feeds 
from all three datasets are partially 
covered by clouds. The project 
proponent determines that correcting all 
three available data feeds would be 
excessive, and therefore determines not 
to use any such data to determine 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
84
DMRV Type 
Issue 
Guidance 
Example Use 
values for that parameter. The project 
proponent documents this and uses 
alternative data for this parameter 
value.  
Verifiability 
Only use publicly available RS 
datasets or ensure all proprietary 
RS data are made available to the 
VVB to enable them to 
validate/verify work undertaken.  
A project proponent uses a combination 
of public and proprietary RS datasets 
and provides the VVB access to their 
GIS-enabled platform, enabling the VVB 
to undertake spot checks.  
Project proponents should only 
use RS to create data that can be 
independently verified.  
A project proponent uses RS to 
demonstrate fields were double 
cropped. The project employs a GIS-
enabled platform and allows the VVB 
access, enabling the VVB to have an 
efficient means to validate historical 
and contemporary double cropping via 
remote desktop audits.  
Machine 
learning / 
artificial 
intelligence 
(ML/AI) 
Features 
Project proponents should report 
on their feature set and explain 
how each feature is relevant to 
the task at hand. Such data may 
be marked as confidential, in 
which case it will not be made 
publicly available but will be 
available to the VVB and Verra.  
A project proponent reports on their 
ML/AI model feature set, provides the 
VVB with a summary description of how 
the model uses such features, and gives 
the VVB opportunities to test the model 
and ask questions regarding how it 
works. This ensures the system is not a 
“black box,” enabling more effective 
validation and verification of its use.  
Validation 
Project proponents should 
validate ML/AI model results 
against independent ground truth 
data, using either cross-validation 
(preferably spatial rather than 
random) and/or independent 
holdout datasets.  
A project proponent provides the VVB 
and Verra with an analysis of how the 
model was validated, as an additional 
layer of assurance.  
Verifiability 
Project proponents should only 
use ML/AI to create data that can 
be independently verified. 
A project proponent uses an ML/AI 
model to create digital maps of project 
areas and estimate field size. VVBs can 
then independently use RS software 
(such as Google Earth) to estimate field 
size, as well as review other datapoints 
from the project, and then use these to 
validate the ML/AI model outputs.   
Project proponents should identify 
clear means to test their ML/AI 
tools, to facilitate VVB spot-
checking. 
A project proponent provides the VVB 
access to their GIS-enabled platform, 
enabling the VVB to undertake spot 
checks of any farm against other 
datasets provided by the project 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
85 
DMRV Type 
Issue 
Guidance 
Example Use 
proponent, publicly available data, and 
other data gathered by the VVB. 
All DMRV 
systems 
Ground truthing 
Project proponents should 
compare data from multiple 
sources (as outlined in Box 1), 
including:  
• farmer logbooks. 
• literature and/or 
government/public datasets. 
• remote sensing data. 
A project proponent uses digital farmer 
logbooks to capture data for the full 
schedule of activities. RS tools are then 
used to verify many of the most critical 
datapoints, such as confirming rice was 
grown, field preparation dates, irrigation 
dates, dry period dates and duration, 
harvest date, and burning of rice straw. 
The project proponent makes all data 
and the GIS-enabled tool available to 
the VVB to perform independent spot 
checks at the VVB’s discretion.   
Ground truthing 
Project proponents should:  
1) create typical value ranges for 
key parameters (e.g., using 
literature, government/public 
datasets) and flag any 
significant deviation from the 
range. 
2) create a clear process to be 
followed to detect and address 
deviations, and record any/all 
changes to project data. 
3) consider disallowing use of 
data outside the given ranges 
unless justification is given. 
4) retain all information regarding 
such QA/QC measures, 
including their Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
such issues, summary of 
ranges, summary of all data 
inputs outside of range, 
summary of any interactions 
between relevant parties 
regarding flagged data, 
summaries of any changes to 
data, and should make all 
such data available to the VVB 
and Verra.  
A project proponent captures primary 
data using a farmer logbook, and 
compares such data against a typical 
range for the given parameter. Any 
significant deviation from the range is 
flagged by the project proponent and 
project implementation staff are 
required to provide rationale for why the 
value is outside of the expected range. 
Where the project proponent 
determines that a sufficient explanation 
has been given, the out-of-range value is 
adopted. Otherwise the out-of-range 
value is substituted with the most 
conservative value within the given pre-
determined range. The decision made 
by project staff is documented. The VVB 
is presented with all requisite data.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
86 
DMRV Type 
Issue 
Guidance 
Example Use 
Data integrity 
An SOP should be created to 
handle data for each project. This 
should clearly identify how data 
are captured and moved between 
various systems, and whether, 
when, by whom, and how such 
data has been altered since being 
ingested into project digital 
systems. Such systems should be 
auditable and should be made 
available to the VVB and Verra. 
A project proponent makes all 
suggested data available to the VVB. 
This enables the VVB to understand the 
project’s data architecture and flow of 
data through the systems and into the 
project documentation. The VVB can 
then undertake spot checks, choosing 
certain farms and tracing raw data 
through the systems, confirming the 
project proponent followed the SOP, and 
confirming the results appear 
reasonable in the circumstances.  
Validation of 
accuracy of 
digital analysis 
Project proponents using DMRV 
should provide some analysis of 
the accuracy/error rates of the 
digital systems they are deploying. 
Project proponents should 
consider developing an error 
threshold for their systems, and a 
rule whereby they would replace 
any data that fails to meet such 
thresholds.  
A project proponent outsources DMRV 
to a third-party software provider. The 
third-party software provider uses an 
RS-informed, GIS-enabled software tool. 
The third-party software provider 
undertakes their own validation and has 
a threshold of 80% accuracy, whereby 
they test specific analysis functions and 
only use them where the system 
performs with an 80% accuracy rate. 
Any specific data point which is found to 
fail the threshold is also discarded, and 
the project proponent is directed to use 
alternative data points for the given 
parameter.  
 
 
VM0051, v1.0