43 
BCEFR  
Biomass conversion and expansion factor applicable to wood removals in the 
project area, t.d.m m-3; 26 
i  
1, 2, 3 … M strata; 
j  
1, 2, 3 … J tree species; and 
t  
1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the start of the IFM project activity. 
Option B: Non-Fire Natural Disturbances  
For non-fire natural disturbances, it is assumed that a disturbance event in the project scenario 
would also have occurred in the baseline scenario. Project emissions are therefore equal to the 
non-fire natural disturbance to biomass absent in the baseline scenario (harvested and 
removed), but present in the project scenario. 
It is conservatively assumed that the natural disturbance is a stand-replacing disturbance, and 
that the biomass change as a result of the natural disturbance (∆CDIST,t|PRJ) is emitted in the 
year of disturbance. 
Where non-fire natural disturbances occur ex post in the project area, the area disturbed must 
be delineated. 
∆𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽= ∑(𝐴𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡,𝑖,𝑡× ∑{𝐶𝐴𝐵,𝑖,𝑗|𝐵𝑆𝐿}
𝐽
𝑗=1
)
𝑀
𝑖=1
× 44
12 
(35) 
Where:  
ΔCDIST,t|PRJ  
Net greenhouse gas emissions resulting from non-fire natural disturbance in 
year t, tCO2e; 
Adist,i,t 
Area disturbed for stratum i at time t, ha; 27 
CAB,i,j|BSL 
Carbon stock in aboveground biomass per unit area for species j in stratum i,, 
tC· ha-1; 
44/12 
Ratio of molecular weights of carbon dioxide and carbon, tCO2e tC-1; 
i 
1, 2, 3 …M strata; 
j  
1, 2, 3 …J tree species; and 
t  
1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the start of the IFM project activity. 
8.2.2.2 Illegal logging 
It is a requirement that any greenhouse gas emissions from illegal logging above de minimis, 
that may occur in the project area (ΔCDIST_IL,i,t|PRJ) are monitored. 
 
26 See Section 9.1 for information on data selection. 
27 See data and parameters used in monitoring parameter list for information on data selection (p62). 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
44 
At the time of methodology approval, remote sensing technology using optical sensors is not 
capable of direct measurements of biomass and changes therein28, but has some capability to 
identify forest strata that have undergone a change in biomass29. 
As remote methods for monitoring illegal logging are not available at the time of methodology 
approval, the following ground-based methods must be used. 
Option A: PRA 
A participatory rural appraisal (PRA)30 of the communities surrounding the project area must be 
completed to determine if there is the potential for illegal extraction of trees from the project 
area. If this assessment finds no potential pressure for these activities, then illegal logging 
(ΔCDIST_IL,i,t|PRJ) can be assumed to be zero and no monitoring is needed. 
The PRA must be repeated every 2 years. 
Option B: Sampling 
If the results of the PRA suggest that there is potential for illegal logging activities, then limited 
field sampling must be undertaken. 
The area that is potentially subject to degradation (ADIST_IL,i) uses the distance of illegal logging 
penetration to the project area (determined from the PRA), from all access points (access 
buffer), such as roads and rivers or previously cleared areas.. 
The area subject to illegal logging must be delineated (ADIST_IL,i) based on an access buffer from 
all access points, such as roads and rivers or previously cleared areas, to the project area, with 
a width equal to the distance of degradation penetration. 
ADIST_IL,I must be sampled by surveying several transects of known length and width across the 
access-buffer area (equal in area to at least 1% of ADIST_IL,i) to determine the presence or 
absence of new tree stumps. The CDM tool for significance31 must be applied to determine 
significance where there is evidence that trees are being harvested. 
Where application of the CDM tool demonstrates that illegal logging is insignificant, then illegal 
logging can be assumed to be zero and no monitoring is needed. 
 
28However, technology is developing rapidly, including techniques such as RADAR, SAR, or LiDAR. 
29 For example, a multi-temporal set of remotely sensed data can be used to detect changes in the structure of the forest 
canopy. A variety of techniques, such as Spectral Mixture Analysis (Souza et al. 2005 Remote Sensing of Environment 98: 
2–3: 329-343), SAR or LiDAR, can be used under this approach but no specific technology is prescribed here. Some of the 
newer technologies can estimate carbon contents for different forest types, if supported by field information such as 
sample plots to calibrate the technology and fieldwork leading to allometric equations of key species. The project 
proponent should use techniques that are suitable to their specific situation and that have been published in peer-
reviewed papers. 
30 Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) describes a growing family of approaches and methods to enable local people to 
share, enhance and analyze their knowledge of life and conditions. Multiple guidelines are available to conduct a PRA 
(e.g., FAO, 2013 https://www.fao.org/family-farming/detail/en/c/292329/).  
31 http://cdm.unfccc.int/EB/031/eb31_repan16.pdf   
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
45 
This limited sampling must be repeated each time the PRA indicates potential for illegal logging. 
Where limited sampling provides evidence that trees are being illegally removed in the buffer 
area, then systematic sampling must be implemented based on a detailed sampling plan. The 
sampling plan must be designed using plots systematically placed over the buffer zone so that 
at least 3% of the area of the buffer zone is sampled (ADIST_IL,i). The diameter of all tree stumps 
should be measured and conservatively assumed to be the same as the DBH of the removed 
tree(s). Where the stump is a large buttress, several individuals of the same species nearby 
must be located, and a ratio of the diameter at DBH to the diameter of buttress at the same 
height above ground as the measured stumps must be determined. This ratio will be applied to 
the measured stumps to estimate the likely DBH of the cut tree. 
The aboveground carbon stock of each harvested tree will be estimated using the allometric 
regression equations chosen for forest growth in the project scenario32. The mean aboveground 
carbon stock of the harvested trees (CDIST_IL,i,t|PRJ) is conservatively estimated to be, the total 
emissions and, consequently, all emissions enter the atmosphere. 
This sampling procedure must be repeated every five (5) years, and the results annualized by 
dividing the total emissions by five. 
Therefore, where the PRA or the limited sampling indicate no illegal logging occurring: 
∆𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐼𝐿,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽= 0  
(36) 
Where the PRA and the limited sampling indicate that degradation is occurring, net carbon 
stock changes, as a result of illegal logging, must be calculated as: 
∆𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐼𝐿,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽= ∑(𝐴𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐼𝐿,𝑖× 𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐼𝐿,𝑖,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽
𝐴𝑃𝑖
)
𝑀
𝑖=1
 × (1 + 𝑉𝐸𝑋,𝐼𝑁𝐹,𝑗,𝑖|𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑉𝐸𝑋,𝑗,𝑖|𝐵𝑆𝐿
)
+ 𝐶𝐹𝑈𝐸𝐿×
𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐼𝐿,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽 
∑
𝐶𝐸𝑋,𝑖|𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝐼
𝑖=1
× 44/12 × 𝐴𝑖
    
(37) 
Where:  
ΔCDIST_IL,t|PRJ  
Net carbon stock changes from illegal logging at time t, tCO2e; 
ADIST_IL,i 
Area potentially impacted by illegal logging in stratum i, ha; 
CDIST-IL,i,t|PRJ 
Biomass carbon of trees cut and removed through illegal logging in stratum i 
at time t, tCO2e; 
VEX,j,i|BSL 
Mean volume of extracted timber per unit area for species j in stratum i, m3·ha-1; 
 
32 If species-specific equations are used and species cannot be identified from stumps, then it shall be assumed that the 
harvested species is the species most commonly harvested. A PRA shall be used to determine the most commonly 
harvested species. 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
46 
𝑉𝐸𝑋,𝐼𝑁𝐹,𝑗,𝑖|𝐵𝑆𝐿 
Mean volume of extracted timber for forestry infrastructure per unit area for 
species j in stratum i, m3· ha-1; 
𝐶𝐹𝑈𝐸𝐿 
Total carbon emissions associated with the combustion of fossil fuel in forestry 
and wood processing machinery, in tC; 
CEX,i|BSL 
Change in carbon stock of extracted wood products resulting from timber 
harvest per unit area in stratum i in land parcel p, in tC ha-1; 
APi  
Total area of illegal logging sample plots in stratum i, ha; 
𝐴𝑖 
Logging area in stratum i, in ha; 
i 
1, 2, 3 … M strata in the in the project case; and 
t  
1, 2, 3, … t years elapsed since the projected start of the project activity. 
This approach not only considers the reductions of carbon stocks due to illegal logging, but also 
considers fuel emissions of illegal logging operations and potential emissions from 
infrastructure development during illegal logging. 
The emissions of infrastructure development due to illegal logging are estimated by determining 
an expansion factor based on regular baseline harvesting practices (i.e., the relation of volume 
extracted due to infrastructure development compared to the merchantable volume extracted). 
As it is unlikely that illegal logging will result in large-scale infrastructure development (i.e., 
equating the baseline scenario), this approach is considered conservative. 
Fuel emissions from illegal logging operations are determined by using the specific fuel 
emissions of the baseline scenario (i.e., total fuel emissions are divided by the total carbon 
stock changes due to baseline logging operations) which are then multiplied by the illegal 
logging volume. As it is unlikely that illegal logging would involve the deployment of large, fuel 
intensive machinery (i.e., equaling the baseline scenario), this is considered conservative. 
The calculation of emissions from illegal logging therefore requires use of both parameters 
available at validation (Section 9.1) and parameters monitored (Section 9.2). 
8.2.3 Net carbon stock change in the project scenario 
The net carbon stock change in the project scenario is the annual carbon stock change in the 
aboveground biomass of trees due to forest growth minus the sum of net carbon stock changes 
resulting from fire, non-fire forest disturbance and illegal logging. 
Therefore, the net carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t, is calculated as: 
∆𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽= ∆𝐶𝐴𝐵,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽−(∆𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐹𝑅,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽+ ∆𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇,𝑡,𝑃𝑅𝐽+ ∆𝐶𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇−𝐼𝐿,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽) 
(38) 
 
 
Where: 
ΔCNET,t|PRJ 
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t, tCO2-e; 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
47 
ΔCAB,t|PRJ  
Annual carbon stock change in aboveground biomass of trees in year t, 
tCO2e;  
ΔCDIST_FR,t|PRJ  
Net greenhouse gas emissions resulting from fire disturbance in year t, tCO2e  
ΔCDIST,t|PRJ 
Net carbon stock change resulting from non-fire natural disturbance in year t, 
tCO2e; 
ΔCDIST_IL,t|PRJ 
Net carbon stock changes as a result of illegal logging in year t, tCO2e; 
t  
1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since start of the project activity. 
 
The net carbon stock change across the project scenario since the start of the project is calculated as: 
𝛥𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝑃𝑅𝐽= ∑∆𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡|𝑃𝑅𝐽
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 
(39) 
 
 
Where: 
ΔCNET|PRJ  
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario since the start of the project 
activity, tCO2e; 
ΔCNET,t|PRJ  
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t, tCO2e; and 
t  
1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since start of the project activity. 
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
8.3.1 Activity shifting leakage 
There may be no leakage due to activity shifting. 
Where the project proponent controls multiple parcels of land within the country, the project 
proponent must demonstrate that the management plans and/or land-use designations of 
other lands they control have not materially changed as a result of the planned project (e.g., 
designating new lands as timber concessions or increasing harvest rates in lands already 
managed for timber), because such changes could lead to reductions in carbon stocks or 
increases in GHG emissions. 
This must be demonstrated through: 
• 
Historical records showing trends in harvest volumes paired with records from the with- 
project time period showing no deviation from historical trends; 
• 
Forest management plans prepared ≥24 months prior to the start of the project 
showing harvest plans on all owned/managed lands paired with records from the with-
project time period showing no deviation from management plans. 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
48 
At each verification, documentation must be provided covering the other lands controlled by the 
project proponent where leakage could occur, including, at a minimum, their location(s), area 
and type of existing land use(s), and management plans. 
Where activity shifting occurs or a project proponent is unable to provide the necessary 
documentation at first and subsequent verification, the project must not meet the requirements 
for verification. Therefore, the project must be subject to the conditions described in the VCS 
AFOLU Guidance Document on projects which fail to submit periodic verification after the 
commencement of the project. The project proponent may optionally choose to submit a 
methodology deviation with their future verifications to address activity shifting leakage. 
Where the project proponent has control only over resource use in the project area and has no 
access to other forest resources, then the only type of leakage emissions calculated is GHG 
emissions due to market effects that result from project activity. 
8.3.2 Market leakage 
Leakage due to market effects (LFME) is equal to the net emissions from planned timber 
harvest activities in the baseline scenario multiplied by an appropriate leakage factor. 
The leakage factor (see Box 2 below) is determined by considering where in the country logging 
will increase as a result of the decreased timber supply caused by the project. 
If the ratio of merchantable biomass to total biomass is higher in the project area, it is likely 
that additional logging will be performed in these areas as a result of reduced logging in the 
project area in the project scenario. 
The leakage factor is thus defined as a dimensionless number with values between 0 and 1, 
assigned ex ante based on a comparison between the ratio of merchantable biomass to total 
biomass across all strata in the base year, and the ratio of merchantable biomass to total 
biomass of the country’s forest estate where harvesting would likely be displaced to. 
Box 2: Leakage Factor Calculation 
The leakage factor is determined by considering where in the country logging will increase as a result 
of the decreased supply of timber caused by the project. If the areas liable to be logged have a higher 
ratio of merchantable biomass to total biomass higher than the project area it is likely that the 
proportional leakage is higher and vice versa: 
Therefore, 
LFME = 0 
if it can be demonstrated that no market-effects leakage will occur within national boundaries, that is 
if no new concessions are being assigned AND annual extracted volumes cannot be increased within 
existing national concessions AND illegal logging is absent (or de minimis) in the host country. 
The amount of leakage is determined by where in the country’s forest estate harvesting would likely be 
displaced. If harvesting is displaced to forests where a lower proportion of forest biomass is 
merchantable material from harvestable species compared to the project area, then in order to extract 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
49 
a given volume, higher emissions should be expected as more trees will need to be cut to supply the 
same volume. 
In contrast, if a higher proportion of the total biomass of commercial species is merchantable in the 
displacement forest than in the project forests, then a smaller area would have to be harvested, and 
thus lower emissions would result. 
Therefore, each project must calculate within each stratum the ratio of merchantable biomass to total 
biomass (PMPi). This shall then be compared to the ratio of merchantable biomass to total biomass for 
each forest type (PMLFT). 
The following deduction factors (LFME) shall be used: 
PMLFT is equal (± 15%) to PMPi 
 
LFME = 0.4 
PMLFT is > 15% less than PMPi 
 
LFME = 0.7 
PMLFT is > 15% greater than PMPi  
LFME = 0.2 
Where: 
PMLFT: mean merchantable biomass as a proportion of total aboveground tree biomass for each forest 
type, %; 
PMPi: 
merchantable biomass as a proportion of total aboveground tree biomass for stratum i within 
the project boundaries, %; and 
LFME: 
Leakage factor for market-effects calculations; dimensionless. 
Where sufficient variation exists in PMPi relative to PMLFT that multiple values of LFME result, then an 
area weighted final value for LFME shall be calculated. The area of stratum i as a proportion of the total 
project area shall be multiplied by LFME. All values are then summed up to arrive at the area weighted 
final value of LFME. 
8.4 
Summary of Net GHG Emission Reductions and Carbon Dioxide 
Removals 
 
Net GHG emission reductions are calculated as: 
 
𝐸𝑅𝑡= (𝐶𝐹𝑈𝐸𝐿−𝑀𝐼𝑁 (0, 𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡∗) +  𝑀𝐼𝑁(0,𝛥𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝑃𝑅𝐽) × (1 −𝐿𝐹𝑀𝐸) × (1 −𝑈total|LtPF  ) 
(40) 
 
Where: 
𝐸𝑅𝑡∗ 
Net GHG emission reductions in year t* since the start of the project activity, in the 
project scenario, tCO2e; 
𝐶𝐹𝑈𝐸𝐿 
Total carbon emissions associated with the combustion of fossil fuel in forestry and 
wood processing machinery, in tCO2e. 
CNET|BS,t* 
Net carbon stock change in the baseline scenario in the year t* since the start 
of the project activity, tCO2e; 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
50 
ΔCNET|PRJ 
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario since the start of the project 
activity, tCO2e; 
LFME 
Leakage factor for market-effects calculations, dimentionless; 
Utotal|LtPF 
Total uncertainty for LtPF Project, dimensionless;  
MIN 
Function to find the lowest number in a range 
 
Net carbon dioxide removals are calculated as 
𝐶𝑅𝑡∗= (𝑀𝐴𝑋(0, 𝛥𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝑃𝑅𝐽) −𝑀𝐴𝑋(0,𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡∗)) × (1 −𝑈total|LtPF  )  
(41) 
 
Where: 
𝐶𝑅𝑡∗ 
Net carbon dioxide removals in year t* since the start of the project activity, in 
the project scenario, tCO2e; 
ΔCNET|PRJ  
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario since the start of the project 
activity, tCO2e; 
CNET|BS,t* 
Net greenhouse gas emissions in the baseline scenario in the year t* since 
the start of the project activity, tCO2e; 
LFME 
Leakage factor for market-effects calculations, dimentionless; 
Utotal|LtPF  
Total uncertainty for LtPF Project, dimensionless; 
MAX 
Function to find the highest number in a range 
8.5 
Uncertainty 
 
Estimated greenhouse gas emissions and emission reductions from IFM activities have uncertainties 
associated with parameters and coefficients including estimates of area, carbon stocks, regrowth and 
expansion factors. It is assumed that the uncertainties associated with input data are available, either 
as default uncertainty values given in most recent IPCC guidelines, or as statistical estimates based on 
sampling. 
Uncertainty at all times is defined at the 95% confidence interval where the estimated variance 
exceeds +/- 15 percent from the mean. Procedures including stratification and the allocation of 
sufficient measurement plots will help ensure that low uncertainty results and ultimately full crediting 
can result. 
It is good practice to consider uncertainty at an early stage to identify the data sources with the highest 
uncertainty to allow the opportunity to conduct further work to diminish uncertainty. 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
51 
Uncertainties arising from the measurement and monitoring of carbon pools and greenhouse gases 
must always be quantified. Errors in each pool must be weighted by the size of the pool so that projects 
may reasonably target a lower precision level in pools that only form a small proportion of the total 
stock. 
For both the baseline and the with-project case, total uncertainty is equal to the square root of the sum 
of the squares of each uncertainty component and is calculated at the time of reporting through 
propagating the error in the baseline stocks and the error in the project stocks. 
Therefore, total uncertainty for LtPF project is calculated as: 
𝑈𝑇𝑂𝑇𝐴𝐿|𝐿𝑡𝑃𝐹= √𝑈2|𝑃𝑅𝐽+ 𝑈2|𝐵𝑆𝐿 
(42) 
 
 
Where: 
Utotal|LtPF  
Total uncertainty for LtPF Project, dimensionless; 
U|PRJ  
Total uncertainty for the improved forest management activities in the project 
scenario, dimensionless; and 
U|BSL  
Total uncertainty for the baseline scenario, dimensionless. 
 
The project proponent must justify the selection of uncertainty propagation in the project documents. If 
Utotal|LtPF  ≤ 0.15 then no deduction will result for uncertainty. 
If Utotal|LtPF > 0.15 then the amount of greenhouse gas emission credits associated with IFM activities 
will be deducted from the net reductions and removals. 
8.6 
Calculation of Verified Carbon Units  
 
To calculate the number of Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) that may be issued, the project proponent must 
consider the number of buffer credits which must be deposited in the AFOLU pooled buffer account. 
The number of buffer credits that must be deposited is calculated by multiplying the non-permanence 
risk rating by the net change in carbon stocks (see Section 3.2.30 in the latest version of the VCS 
Standard Requirements). The buffer credits are quantified separately for removals and reductions as: 
 
𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡∗= (𝑀𝐴𝑋(0,𝛥𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝑃𝑅𝐽) −𝑀𝐴𝑋(0,𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡∗)) × 𝑁𝑃𝑅%    
(43) 
Where: 
𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡∗ 
Buffer credits to be deducted from removals in year t* (t CO2e) 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
52 
ΔCNET|PRJ  
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario since the start of the project 
activity, tCO2e; 
CNET|BS,t* 
Net greenhouse gas emissions in the baseline scenario in the year t* since 
the start of the project activity, tCO2e; 
𝑁𝑃𝑅% 
Overall project non-permanence risk rating converted to a percentage 
 
𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡∗= (𝑀𝐼𝑁(0, 𝛥𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝑃𝑅𝐽) −𝑀𝐼𝑁(0,𝐶𝑁𝐸𝑇|𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑡∗)) × 𝑁𝑃𝑅%    
(44) 
Where: 
𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡∗ 
Buffer credits to be deducted from reductions in year t* (t CO2e) 
ΔCNET|PRJ  
Net carbon stock change in the project scenario since the start of the project 
activity, tCO2e; 
CNET|BS,t* 
Net greenhouse gas emissions in the baseline scenario in the year t* since 
the start of the project activity, tCO2e; 
𝑁𝑃𝑅% 
Overall project non-permanence risk rating converted to a percentage 
 
The total VCUs that result from project activities leading to removals is calculated as: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑅,𝑡∗= 𝐶𝑅𝑡∗−𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡∗ 
 
(45) 
Where: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑅,𝑡∗ 
Number of verified carbon units, in year t*, that result from project activities 
leading to removals 
𝐶𝑅𝑡∗ 
Net carbon dioxide removals in year t* since the start of the project activity, in 
the project scenario, tCO2e; 
𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡∗ 
Buffer credits to be deducted from removals in year t* (t CO2e) 
 
The total VCUs that result from project activities leading to reductions is calculated as: 
 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐸𝑅,𝑡∗= 𝐸𝑅𝑡∗−𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡∗   
 
(46) 
Where: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐸𝑅,𝑡∗ 
Number of verified carbon units, in year t*, that result from project activities 
leading to reductions 
𝐸𝑅𝑡∗ 
Net emission reductions in year t* since the start of the project activity, in the 
project scenario, tCO2e; 
𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡∗ 
Buffer credits to be deducted from reductions in year t* (t CO2e) 
  
 
VM0010, v1.4 
53