3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions, the following definitions 
apply to this methodology: 
Accounting boundary 
Applies to census-based projects as the specific spatial area within the project boundary where 
GHG emissions, carbon dioxide removals, and GHG emission reductions are quantified. The 
accounting boundary exists entirely within the project boundary and is limited to individual 
planting units. It excludes soil organic carbon, litter, and non-woody biomass outside those units. 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
7 
Control plot 
Plot located outside of the project area that is selected based on its similarity to a project plot 
and that is monitored via remote sensing techniques. 
Donor pool area 
Geospatial domain with similar attributes to project plots, within which control plots may be 
selected. 
Land use change date 
Date on which a change in land use occurred (e.g., cessation of grazing, establishment of an 
exclosure). 
Managed forests 
Forest lands actively managed for wood products, including saw timber, pulpwood, and fuelwood. 
This includes both plantation forests and natural forests (primary and secondary) where 
harvesting or other silvicultural activities occur. 
Matching covariates 
Continuous variables from which control plots are matched to each project plot, minimally 
including historical and initial stocking indices (SI) 
Multivariate distance metric 
Metric that computes the distance between two vectors (e.g., Mahalanobis distance). It is used to 
quantify the match or “closeness” between prospective control plots and project plots. 
Planting unit 
Clearly defined individual woody plants (e.g., tree, shrub, discrete bamboo clump) that are 
identifiable in the field and subject to a complete census under the census-based approach. 
Pre-existing woody biomass 
Woody biomass in the project area prior to project implementation, including aboveground, 
belowground, and deadwood (where included as a relevant pool). 
Project plot 
Remotely sensed plot of up to 10 ha representatively sampled from the project area, from 
which the stocking index (SI) is evaluated. 
Site preparation 
ARR project activities undertaken prior to any planting that remove or disturb pre-existing 
biomass or soil in the project area. 
Stocking index (SI) 
An unspecified remote sensing metric with demonstrated correlation with terrestrial aboveground 
carbon stocks (e.g., normalized difference fraction index – NDVI - from Landsat imagery, average 
canopy height derived from light detection and ranging (LiDAR)). 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
8 
Woody biomass 
Biomass in plants with hard, lignified stems (e.g., trees, shrubs, palms, and bamboo). Includes 
aboveground and belowground woody biomass pools.