6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
The baseline scenario is the pre-project situation in which the food is not ultimately consumed by 
people and is sent to any FLW destination (see Figure 1). Project proponents must identify the 
FLW destination where pre-project FLW flows ended up. Next, project proponents must specify 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
10 
 
the characteristics of the treatment technology at the FLW destination to which the recovered 
food would otherwise have gone. 
All FLW flows covered by the project activities must be characterized in terms of mass (i.e., 
expressed as pounds, kilograms, tons, or metric tons [tonnes]) and water or dry matter (DM) 
content, which affects the calculation of avoided GHG emissions (see Section 8). FLW flows must 
also be mapped to the FLW source(s) and FLW destination(s) prior to the project start date. 
Project proponents must demonstrate that food would have been discarded and exited the 
human food chain in the absence of the project and quantify GHG emissions in the baseline 
scenario based on evidence. This will require information on the following:  
• 
Data to calculate, estimate or infer the FLW flows. Including their characteristics (e.g., 
food type, classified using the Codex General Standard for Food Additives [GSFA] 
categories) such that the FLW flows are accounted for and reported in line with the 
requirements of the FLW Standard;  
• 
Description of the activity that generates FLW and its location; 
• 
Description of the FLW destination and its location, as well as the characteristics of the 
treatment technology at the FLW destination to which the recovered food would 
otherwise have gone; and 
• 
Transport methods and transport distances from the FLW source to FLW destination, 
either measured or otherwise inferred from available information using conservative 
assumptions. 
 
The following data considerations must be addressed: 
• 
Credible evidence such as contractual agreements and waste management records (in-
house, or ideally externally verified) must be provided to show that the food recovered by 
the project activity, was previously sent to the FLW destinations used to calculate the 
baseline scenario. 
• 
For project activities that divert FLW to an animal feed destination, the project proponent 
must provide credible evidence that the animals consuming this feed stay in the human 
food chain, e.g., vendor sales records. 
The time period considered when calculating the food diverted from an FLW destination and the 
related GHG emissions is one calendar year (365 days). If dealing with FLW flows that vary over 
the course of a year, project proponents are required to follow the guidance on sampling and 
scaling data in the FLW Standard and follow the principle of conservativeness. Moreover, where 
FLW flows vary from year to year (e.g., on agricultural lands where weather has a significant 
impact on yield) or in the case of an anomalous year (e.g., because of serious disruptions due to 
a natural disaster or a pandemic such as COVID-19), project proponents must apply a three-year 
average.  
 
 
 
 
VM0046, v1.0 
11