6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
6.1 
Determination of the Most Plausible Baseline Scenario 
Determination of the most plausible baseline scenario builds on the outcome of the additionality 
analysis (Section 7) and must be consistent with the description of the conditions prior to the 
project start date. VT0001 must be used to assess the project additionality. The stepwise 
approach below must be followed in addition to VT0001 to determine the most plausible baseline 
scenario.  
Step 1: Reuse the plausible alternative land use scenarios to the REDD project activity that have 
been listed as an outcome of Sub-step 1b of the additionality tool VT0001.  
Unless it has been demonstrated that any of these land use scenarios are not credible or do not 
comply with all mandatory applicable legislation and regulations as required by VT0001 Sub-step 
1b, the list of plausible alternative land use scenarios must include at least: 
1) Continuation of the pre-project land use; 
2) Project activity performed on the land within the project boundary without being 
registered as a VCS REDD project; and 
3) Activities similar to the proposed project activity on at least part of the land within the 
project boundary of the proposed REDD project. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
9 
Step 2a: Where the VT0001 barrier analysis is used to demonstrate additionality, apply the 
decision tree in Figure 1 to the list of all alternative land use scenarios from Step 1 that are not 
prevented by any barrier.  
 
Step 2b: Where the VT0001 investment analysis is used to demonstrate additionality, and if at 
least one land use scenario generates financial benefits other than carbon revenues, select the 
baseline scenario as below:  
4) Where VT0001 Option I is used, the baseline scenario is the land use scenario with the 
lowest costs over the crediting period). Option I may only be applied if the alternative 
scenarios do not include revenues.  
5) Where VT0001 Option II is used, the baseline scenario is the most economically or 
financially attractive land use scenario (i.e., the scenario with the most favorable 
financial indicator such as internal rate of return). 
6) Where VT0001 Option III is used and none of the alternative land use scenarios have a 
financial indicator that meets the benchmark, the baseline scenario is the continuation 
of the pre-project land use. Where Option III is used and at least one of the land use 
scenarios has a financial indicator that meets the benchmark, the baseline scenario is 
the scenario that has the most favorable financial indicator (e.g., internal rate of return, 
net present value or cost-benefit ratio). 
Figure 1. Barrier analysis decision tree 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
10 
Step 3: Where barrier analysis is used to demonstrate additionality but does not allow 
determination of the baseline scenario, implement one of the following: 
1) An investment analysis following VT0001 Option II (regardless of whether it has been 
used to demonstrate additionality). Select the most plausible baseline as specified in 
Step 2b above; or 
2) Through qualitative analysis, estimate the baseline GHG emissions for each alternative 
land use scenario that is not prevented by any barrier. The baseline scenario is the land 
use scenario that allows for the lowest baseline GHG emissions. Estimates must be 
based on publicly available default factors and standards, such as the IPCC 2006 
Guidelines for National GHG Inventories and its 2019 Refinements or the IPCC 2003 
Good Practice Guidelines for LULUCF. All other data used must be publicly available 
and must come from recognized, credible sources, such as peer-reviewed literature.   
Quantification of GHG emissions under the selected baseline scenario must follow the applicable 
and relevant activity-type module(s). 
6.2 
Projects Implemented in Jurisdictional REDD Programs or Where a 
Government has Established a REDD Baseline 
Projects that are implemented within a registered JNR program are eligible to use this 
methodology for activities included under that program. However, projects must be nested 
according to the requirements set out in the JNR Scenario 1 Requirements or JNR Scenario 2 
Requirements, as appropriate.  
REDD projects that are implemented within a non-JNR REDD jurisdictional program should also 
follow the relevant jurisdictional program’s requirements (e.g., with respect to baseline, as set out 
in AUDef), but they must be registered and monitored under VCS following this methodology. 
Further clarification is set out in the relevant module(s). 
Where the baseline estimated using the activity data allocated to the project through this 
methodology is higher than the local government’s baseline, a project proponent may elect to 
limit the amount of VCUs it issues to the amount that would be issued based on this lower 
baseline. Where required by local regulations, such limitation is mandatory.  
6.3 
Baseline Validity 
Baseline projections beyond the baseline validity period are not required for REDD project 
activities. 
The project baseline must be reassessed per the VCS Standard and the requirement in the 
relevant module. The date of the next scheduled baseline reassessment must be specified in the 
project description. 
 
VM0048, v1.0 
11