8 
QUANTIFICATION OF GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions: 
The baseline emissions are calculated from the baseline scenario selected in Section 6.  This baseline scenario 
does not change during the project duration, however, as outlined in Section 8.2.4, certain data or model 
parameter changes may require remodeling baseline carbon pools in future verifications.   
All calculations in this methodology represent annualized net changes in carbon stocks by polygon. Results from 
each polygon must therefore be summed across the project activity area to determine the annual total net 
emissions and reductions.   
Valid Starting Inventory Requirements 
Project proponents must provide a valid starting forest inventory meeting the following requirements: 
1. Pertaining directly to the entire project area; and, 
2. Created, updated, or validated <10 years ago; and, 
3. Documentation is available describing the methods used to create, update, or otherwise validate the 
starting inventory, including statistical analysis, field data, and/or other evidence11,12.   
Baseline Scenario Area Stratification 
The process of stratifying the area represented in the baseline scenario should include two steps. The first is to 
divide the area (ABSL) into homogeneous units (polygons) from the perspective of carbon storage and 
sequestration.  The second step is to identify areas within the project area that are eligible for specific forest 
management activities within the baseline and project scenario. 
STEP 1 – Stratify to create homogeneous units 
If the project activity area is not homogeneous, stratification should be carried out to improve the accuracy and 
precision of biomass estimates13.  Different stratifications may be required for the baseline and project scenarios in 
order to improve accuracy in the estimates of net GHG removal by sinks.  For estimation of the baseline net GHG 
removals by sinks, or calculation of actual net GHG removals, homogeneous polygons14 should be defined on the 
basis of parameters that will be used as key entry variables in the methods used to estimate changes in biomass 
stocks (for example, growth models or yield curves/tables). These include:  
1. Management regime. For example, types of harvesting (clear cutting, patch retention), and land 
conversions for roads and landings. 
2. Site index / anticipated growth rates  
3. Forest species  
4. Age class  
Useful tools for defining polygons include ground-truthing maps from satellite imagery, aerial photos, and maps of 
vegetation, soils, and topography.  
                                              
11 Note that this methodology evaluates uncertainty using actual results from an ex-post plot network program (see Section 8.5.3) and hence 
does not mandate a starting inventory accuracy requirement. Project proponents, however, must provide evidence that the starting inventory 
has been validated to regional common practice minimum standards for use in ex-ante modeling.   
12 Project proponents may provide supporting evidence using local inventory validation results from outside the project area if: they are based 
on directly comparable inventory methods, overall average forest cover and condition are comparable, and if the data refer to comparable or 
larger scale properties.   
13 For further details, see http://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/YDYGY2G5VNPKVHB7B9SU12RRWRL439/view.html 
14 At minimum, more than one polygon per project is required for the statistical calculations in Section 8.5.3.  
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
12 
In the case where a project area is large and spans a diverse range of forest types and ages, the area may need 
to be stratified into hundreds or even thousands of polygons. When the number of polygons is ≥ 25, the proponent 
has the option of aggregating similar polygons into “analysis units15” to facilitate modeling and monitoring. This 
practice is common when planning management activities over large forest management areas. The use of 
analysis units allows polygons to be grouped based on similarities in the polygon criteria, including removing 
differences associated with stand age. Each analysis unit is modeled from the period of stand initiation to a mature 
end point. The attributes (e.g. biomass and dead organic matter pools) of each analysis unit are recorded for every 
year of growth and stored in a database that can easily be linked back to a specific stand age. 
STEP 2 – Identify areas eligible for specific management activities 
To assure the project includes only eligible management activities, proponents must identify areas within the 
project boundary that would be subject to timber harvesting and other management activities under the baseline 
scenario. A timber harvesting land base (THLB) should be identified based upon harvesting plans that reflect the 
historical and future anticipated location and rates of timber extraction. Specific information used to define the 
THLB should include:   
1. The spatial location and extent of forested versus non-forested areas 
2. Merchantable and operable forest areas suited to economic timber extraction 
3. The spatial location and extent of legal land use restrictions and legally required protected areas. 
The THLB is essentially used to refine and focus baseline and project forest management activity projections and 
modeling, in a manner consistent with the selected scenarios and related common practice.   
8.1.1 
Model Selection and Use 
It will be necessary to employ mathematical models to project annual carbon stock changes over time in the 
various carbon pools.  Although it may be possible to utilize a series of spreadsheet calculations for simple forest 
situations, in most cases complex forest management models (both at the stand and landscape-level) will need to 
be employed. Regardless of the type of model used, the same model must be used for both the baseline and 
project scenarios to ensure consistency in the carbon projections. 
A hierarchy of suitability should be applied in selecting an appropriate model, in accordance with the following 
criteria: 
1. Well established (i.e., have been under continuous use and development for 10 years, or longer); 
2. Generate values on an annual basis (preferably), or at intervals not exceeding 10 years. 
3. Include a reasonable representation of mortality from stand-self thinning and natural disturbance agents 
that are regionally appropriate. Adjustments may need to be made by project proponents to account for 
these factors if they are not well represented. Rationale must be provided when making adjustments. 
4. Output data are expressed in carbon units (tC/ha) or as biomass (t/ha), and are calculated for each of the 
required carbon pools (See Table 1). If expansion factors are used in combination with growth and yield 
model(s), they should be based upon regionally specific studies and applied only for the appropriate region 
and species. 
5. Well documented and expert reviewed. In order of preference, these include (a) ongoing publications in 
peer-reviewed scientific journals, (b) documented reviews by expert practitioners in 
forestry/biology/ecology, and/or (c) approved by government for use in forest management activities; 
6. Parameterized, calibrated, and tested for the specific conditions of the project.  
                                              
15 At minimum, more than one analysis unit is required for the statistical calculations in Section 8.5.3.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
13 
The following criteria are preferred but not required: 
7. Documented as appropriate for simulating the ecological and management scenarios that define the 
baseline and project case;  
8. Process-based models that simulate carbon dynamics directly (in the case of stand-level models) or in the 
case of landscape models (i.e. forest estate models), be driven by inputs from these stand level models. 
Process models that simulate all carbon pools within an ecosystem are preferred because their projections 
of carbon dynamics in the required and optional pools should be more accurate and easier to monitor and 
verify. Examples of appropriate stand-level growth models include FORECAST (Seely, Kimmins, Welham, 
& Scoullar, 1999), and CO2FIX (Masera & et al, 2003) 
9. Growth and yield models are commonly used to project productivity in managed and unmanaged forest 
stands. In most cases their output is in the form of an annual merchantable timber volume increment.  
Examples include TASS/TIPSY, and VDYP (British Columbia Ministry of Forests and Range16), and the 
US Forest Service’s Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) model17. This approach is less desirable because 
volume must be converted using a series of expansion factors representing each carbon pool. An example 
of this approach is the Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian Forest Service (CBM CFS3 (Kurz & et al., 
2009), which uses volume curves as input data. For details on the use of expansion factors, see Pearson 
et al. 2007. This extra step in conversion introduces the potential for additional error into the pool 
estimates.  
In addition, project proponents will make available, at validator/verifier request, documentation of: 
1. The appropriateness of the selected model(s) to the particular project application; 
2. A listing and explanation of all input data, output data, and model parameters/assumptions.   
8.1.2 
Calculating the Baseline Carbon Balance 
This methodology employs the IPCC gain-loss method (IPCC, 2006a), which requires the biomass carbon loss be 
subtracted from the biomass carbon increment for the reporting year. This method is particularly appropriate for 
areas with a mix of stands of different forest types, and/or where biomass change is very small compared to the 
total amount of biomass. Further details can be found in (IPCC, 2006a) (Ch. 4). 
The total annual carbon balance in year, t, for the baseline scenario is calculated as (∆CBSL,t, in t C yr-1):  
∆CBSL,t = ∆CBSL,P,t 
(1) 
where: 
∆CBSL,P,t =  annual change in carbon stocks in all pools in the baseline across the project activity area; t C yr-1 . 
∆CBSL,P,t = ∆CBSL,LB,t + ∆CBSL,DOM,t + ∆CBSl,HWP,t 
(2) 
where: 
∆CBSL,LB,t = annual change in carbon stocks in living tree biomass (above- and belowground); t C yr-1  
∆CBSL,DOM,t = annual change in carbon stocks in dead organic matter; t C yr-1 
∆CBSl,HWP,t = annual change in carbon stocks associated with harvested wood products, t C yr-1.   
                                              
16 http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hre/StandDevMod/index.htm 
17 http://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/fvs/ 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
14 
∆CBSL,LB,t = ∆CBSL,G,t – ∆CBSL,i,t 
(3) 
where: 
∆CBSL,G,t = annual increase in tree carbon stock from growth; t C yr-1 
∆CBSL,L,t = annual decrease in tree carbon stock from a reduction in live biomass; t C yr-1.  
If the project area has been stratified, carbon pools are calculated for each polygon, i, and then summed during a 
given year, t.   
8.1.3 
Live Biomass Gain 
Live biomass gain in year, t, polygon, i (∆CBSL,G,i.t) is calculated as:  
∆CBSL,G,t = Σ(ABSL,i ● GBSL,i,t) ● CF 
(4) 
where: 
ABSL,i, = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i;  
GBSL,i,t = annual increment rate in tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1 yr-1), in  polygon, i, and; 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter t C t-1 d.m. (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
GBSL,i,t = GBSL,AG,i,t + GBSL,BG,i,t 
(5a) 
where: 
GBSL,AG,i,t and GBSL,BG,i,t = annual above- and belowground biomass increment rates (t d.m. ha-1 yr-1); 
GBSL,BG,i,t = GBSL,AG,i,t ● Ri 
(5b) 
where Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i. Ri should ideally be estimated for each polygon, but these data are 
difficult to derive empirically. Hence, general relationships are acceptable as long as they are appropriate for the 
species and region associated with the project (Cairns, 1997). 
Equations 4 and 5 can be used directly to calculate ∆CBSL,G,t when all tree cover within a polygon is removed by 
harvesting (i.e., clearfelling) and no residual structure is retained. In cases of partial harvesting and/or multiple 
entries into a polygon, these equations must be applied separately to each of the resulting sub-polygons (the 
different age classes that are created). This ensures that growth rates reflect the difference in forest age between 
the sub-polygons. 
The ex ante calculation of GBSL,i,t (either directly, or from its component parts) will be derived from models that 
require inputs derived, in part, from forest inventory data. Criteria for model suitability are provided in 8.1.1.1. The 
exact form of the input data depends on the nature of the model but may include site index, species composition, 
and volume.  
Inventory data used for this purpose must: 
1. Pertain directly to the project area, and 
2. Not be more than 10 years old. 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
15 
Typically, inventory data provide only a generalized description of stand attributes such that only average values 
(versus species-specific estimates) can be used in the ex ante modeling exercise. 
Some models will require estimates for parameter values not traditionally measured in typical forest inventories 
activities.  Project proponents must make reasonable efforts to acquire sources of such data in accordance with 
the following priority list (best to least desirable):  
1. Project area and forest-type specific 
2. Regional estimates, from the same or similar ecosystems or forest types 
3. National estimates that represent averages for similar forest types 
4. Global estimates for generally similar forest types.   
8.1.4 
Live Biomass Loss 
The annual decrease in live biomass tree carbon from live biomass loss (∆CBSL,L,t; t C yr-1) is the sum of losses 
from: 
1. Natural mortality (i.e. insects, disease, competition, wind, etc.) 
2. Commercial round wood felling  
3. Incidental sources.   
Losses must be specific to a given polygon; each polygon must be summed in order to calculate total annual loss 
across the project activity area. The live biomass losses are not emitted directly, but rather are transferred to dead 
organic matter pools.  
∆CBSL,L,t = Σ(LBLBSL,NATURALi,t + LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t + LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t) ● CF 
(6) 
where: 
LBLBSL,NATURALi,t = annual loss of live tree biomass due to natural mortality in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1   
LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t = annual loss of live tree biomass due to commercial felling in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t = annual loss of live tree biomass from incidental sources in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter; t C t-1 d.m. (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
LBLBSL,NATURALi,t = ABSL,i ● LBBSL,i,t ● f BSL,NATURAL,i,t  
(7)18 
where  
ABSL,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i;  
LBBSL,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t  
LBBSL,i,t is calculated for year, t, beginning with biomass estimates in year t=1 (the project start year) and with 
annual biomass increments (GBSL,i,t) added as per calculations in equation 5a.  
fBSL,NATURAL,i,t = the annual proportion of biomass that dies from natural mortality in polygon , i (unitless; 0 < 
fBSL,NATURALi < 1), year, t. Tree mortality is an ongoing process during stand development. Trees die as a 
consequence of insect attack, disease, competition, or some combination thereof. Hence, mortality can be highly 
                                              
18 Note, for Equation 7, 8, and 9:  (f BSL,NATURAL,i,t + fBSL,HARVEST,i,t + fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t) ≤ 1.0 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
16 
variable between years. This parameter can be applied uniformly across an analysis unit, or individually to a given 
polygon. Sources for mortality estimates include permanent sample plots in similar stand types, literature reports, 
and inventory data.  
LBLFELLINGS,i,t = ABSL,i ● LBBSL,i,t ● fBSL,HARVEST,i,t  
(8) 
where: 
ABSL,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i 
LBBSL,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t (see equation 7 for its calculation). 
fBSL,HARVEST,i,t = the proportion of biomass removed by harvesting from polygon, i, (unitless; 0 < fBSL,HARVESTIi < 1), in 
year, t. Data for this variable should be obtained from harvest schedule information. Values may be constrained by 
(a) the value of fBSL,NATURAL,i,t (i.e., fBSL,HARVEST,i,t < 1- fBSL,NATURAL,i,t), and/or (b) the area of timber available for 
commercial harvest. 
Incidental loss (LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t; t d.m. yr-1) is the additional live tree biomass removed for road and landing 
construction in the polygon, i, and is calculated as a proportion of biomass removed by harvesting:  
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t = ABSL,i ● LBBSL,i,t ● fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t 
(9)  
where: 
ABSL,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i; 
LBBSL,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t  
fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t  = the proportion of additional biomass removed for road and landing construction in polygon, i, year, t 
(unitless; 0 < fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t < 1)19. Data for this variable should be based on regional and local comparative studies 
and experiential information derived from the local forest industry20.   
8.1.5 
Dead Organic Matter Dynamics (∆CBSL,DOM) 
Dead organic matter (DOM) included in this methodology comprises three components: standing dead wood 
(minimum > 5 cm DBH and 1.3 m height; termed snags), lying dead wood (minimum > 5 cm DBH; LDW), and 
belowground dead wood (i.e., dead roots). Standing dead wood is < 45º of vertical, while lying dead wood is > 45º 
of vertical. Carbon stored within dead belowground biomass and lying dead wood pools must not be assumed to 
be released immediately following disturbance.  Rather decay must be modeled using a scientifically credible 
decay function (such as the exponential model referenced in Equation 13) in which a minimum of 10 years is 
required for complete loss of stored carbon. 
 
The annual change in carbon stocks in DOM (∆CBSL,DOM; t C yr-1) is calculated as: 
∆CBSL,DOM,t = ∆CBSL,LDW,t + ∆CBSL,SNAG,t + ∆CBSL,DBG,t 
(10) 
                                              
19 Projecting ex-ante road and landing removals beyond a few years is difficult and complex.  As described, fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t functions 
as a proxy for estimating biomass impacts of all new roads and landings associated with annual harvesting in polygon, i.  
Project proponents can simulate LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t directly, if appropriate models are available.   
20 fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t may be zero or de minimis in cases where a polygon is already roaded.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
17 
where: 
∆CBSL,LDW,t = change in lying dead wood (LDW) carbon stocks in year, t; t C yr-1 
∆CBSL,SNAG,t = change in snag carbon stock in year, t; t C yr-1 
∆CBSL,DBG,t = change in dead belowground biomass carbon stock in year, t; t C yr-1. 
∆CBSL,LDW,t = Σ(LDWBSL,IN,i,t – LDWBSL,OUT,i,t) ● CF 
(11a) 
LDWBSL,i,t+1 = LDWBSL,i,t + (LDWBSL,IN,i,t – LDWBSL,OUT,i,t) 
(11b) 
where: 
LDWBSL,,i,t = The total mass of lying dead wood accumulated in polygon  i , at time, t (t d.m.). 
LDWBSL,IN,i,t = annual increase in LDW biomass for polygon i, year, t (t d.m yr-1). LDW increases occur as a result of 
natural mortality (typically, blowdown), and as a direct or indirect result of harvesting. 
LDWBSL,OUT,i,t = annual loss in LDW biomass through decay, for polygon  i, year, t, (t d.m yr-1) 
LDWBSL,IN,i,t and LDWBSL,OUT,i,t are summed across polygons. 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
LDWBSL,IN,i,t = (LBLBSL,NATURALi,t - LBLBSL,NATURALi,t ● Ri) ● fBSL,BLOWDOWN,i,t +  
((LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t – LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri) +  
(LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t - LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t ● Ri)) ● fBSL,BRANCH,i,t +  
((LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t – LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri) +  
(LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t - LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t ● Ri)) ●  
(1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,t) ● fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t + SNAGBSL,,i,t ● fBSL,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t 
(12) 
where: 
LBLBSL,NATURALi,t, LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t, and LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t are as calculated in equations 7, 8, and 9, respectively. 
Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i (see equation 5b). 
fBSL,BLOWDOWN,i,t = the annual proportion of live aboveground tree biomass subject to blowdown in polygon, i, year, t 
(unitless; 0 < fBSL,BLOWDOWN,i,t < 1). Ex ante estimates must be derived preferably from regional reports in similar 
forest types. 
fBSL,BRANCH,i,t = the annual proportion of aboveground tree biomass comprised of branches > 5 cm diameter in 
polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fBSL,BRANCH,i,t < 1). Ex ante data are available from allometric equations and models (for 
example, (Kurz & Apps, 2006) for Canada; (Smith, Miles, Vissage, & Pugh, 2004) for the U.S.). In the event slash 
burning was undertaken as part of regular management activities, this parameter should be reduced accordingly to 
reflect the proportion of biomass remaining. Estimates should be obtained from expert opinion; as a default, 
assume 100% consumption if slash burning occurs. 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
18 
fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t = the annual proportion of the log bole biomass left on site after assessing and/or merchandizing 
the log bole for quality, in polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t < 1). Preferably, data for this variable must be 
based on regional and local comparative studies and experiential information derived from the local forest industry. 
Otherwise, an average default value of 21% can be used, based on US national summary statistics (Smith, Miles, 
Vissage, & Pugh, 2004). 
SNAGBSL,,i,t = the total mass of the snag pool in polygon, i, year, t (see equation 14b). 
fBSL,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t = the annual proportion of snag biomass in polygon, i, year, t, that falls over and thus is 
transferred to the LDW pool (unitless; 0 < fSNAGFALLDOWN,i,t < 1). Ex ante estimates for this parameter can be derived 
from peer reviewed literature (for example, (Parish, Antos, Ott, & Di Lucca, 2010) and forest carbon accounting 
models that track the rates of input and losses from dead organic matter pools (for example, (Kurz & et al, 2009). 
LDWBSL,OUT,i,t = LDWBSL,,i,t ● fBSL,lwDECAY,i,t 
(13) 
where: 
LDWBSL,,i,t = the total amount of lying deadwood mass in polygon i, year, t (see equation 11b). fBSL,lwDECAY,i,t = the 
annual proportional loss of lying dead biomass due to decay, in polygon i, year, t (unitless; ; 0 < fBSL,lwDECAY,i,t < 1). 
A common approach to ex ante estimation of fBSL,lwDECAY,i,t is to assume mass loss occurs in proportion to the 
amount of mass remaining in accordance with a single exponential model, of the general form: 
Yt = Yo e–kt 
where Yo is the initial quantity of material, Yt the amount left at time t, and k is a decay constant (Harmon, et al., 
1986). Other types of exponential models are available (reviewed in (Harmon, et al., 1986)) and may be more 
appropriate to particular forest types (to be described and justified by the project proponent, if used). Ex ante 
estimates for the decay parameter appropriate for the project should be derived from peer-reviewed literature (for 
example, (Harmon, et al., 1986); (Laiho & and Prescott, 2004); (Harmon et al, 2008)).   
The change in standing dead wood (snag) carbon stock in year, t (t C yr-1) is calculated as: 
∆CBSL,SNAG,t = Σ(SNAGBSL,IN,i,t – SNAGBSL,OUT,i,t) ● CF 
(14a) 
SNAGBSL,i,t+1 = SNAGBSL,i,t + (SNAGBSL,IN,i,t – SNAGBSL,OUT,i,t) 
(14b) 
where: 
SNAGBSL,i,t = The total mass of snags accumulated in polygon i, at time t (t d.m.). 
SNAGBSL,IN,i,t = annual gain in snag biomass for polygon i, year, t (t d.m yr-1). Snag biomass develops as a result of 
natural mortality. In cases where snags are created through management activities, these should be accounted for 
here. 
SNAGBSL,OUT,i,t = annual loss in snag biomass through decay, or falldown (i.e, transfer to the LDW pool)(t d.m yr-1) 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5). 
Note that SNAGBSL,IN,i,t and SNAGBSL,OUT,i,t are summed across polygons. 
SNAGBSL,IN,i,t = (LBLBSL,NATURALi,t - LBLBSL,NATURALi,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fBSL,BLOWDOWN,i,t) 
(15) 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
19 
where: 
LBLBSL,NATURALi,t is as calculated in equation 7, and 
1 - fBSL,BLOWDOWN,i,t is the proportion of live tree aboveground biomass that dies in polygon, i, year, t, but remains as 
standing dead organic matter (i.e., snags) (unitless; 0 < fBSL,BLOWDOWN,i,t < 1). Ex ante default estimates for this 
calculation can be derived from literature values (for example (Harmon, et al., 1986); (Runkle, 2000); (Harmon et 
al, 2008)) and should be matched to the ecosystems that most closely characterize the project area. 
SNAGBSL,OUT,i,t = SNAGBSL,i,t ● fBSL,SWDECAY,i,t + SNAGBSL,i,t ● fBSL,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t  
(16) 
where: 
SNAGBSL,i,t = the total amount of snag mass in polygon i, year, t (see equation 14b). fBSL,SWDECAY,i,t  = the annual 
proportional loss of snag biomass due to decay, in polygon, i, year, t (unitless; 0 < fBSL,SWDECAY,i,t < 1). As with lying 
dead wood, a common approach to estimating fBSL,SWDECAY,i,t is to assume mass loss occurs in proportion to the 
amount of mass remaining in accordance with a single exponential model (see equation 13). Ex ante estimates for 
this parameter should be derived from peer reviewed literature appropriate for the project site (for example, 
Vanderwel et al. 2006a) and forest carbon accounting models that track the rates of input and losses from dead 
organic matter pools for each forest type, productivity, and age-class (see, for example, Vanderwel et al., 2006b; 
(Kurz & et al, 2009)).  
fBSL,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t = the annual proportion of snag biomass in polygon, i, that falls over and thus is transferred to 
the LDW pool (unitless; 0 < fBSL,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t < 1). See equation 12 for parameter estimates.  
The annual change in DOM derived from dead belowground biomass (∆CBSL,DBG, ,t; t C yr-1) is calculated for each 
polygon as per equation 17a. Calculation of ∆CBSL,DBG,t is specific to a given polygon; each polygon must therefore 
be summed in order to calculate total annual loss across the project activity area. 
∆CBSL,DBG,t = Σ(DBGBSL,IN,i,t – DBGBSL,OUT,i,t) ● CF 
(17a) 
DBGBSL,i,t+1 = DBGBSL,i,t + (DBGBSL,IN,i,t – DBGBSL,OUT,i,t) 
(17b) 
where: 
DGBBSL,i,t = The total quantity of dead belowground biomass accumulated in polygon i, at time, t (t d.m.). 
DBGBSL,IN,i,t = annual gain in dead belowground biomass for polygon i, year, t (t d.m yr-1). Dead belowground 
biomass develops as a result of mortality through natural causes or through harvesting activities.  
DBGBSL,OUT,i,t = annual loss in dead belowground biomass through decay, (t d.m yr-1) 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5). 
DBGBSL,IN,i,t = [(ABSL,i ● LBBSL,i,t ● Ri) ●  
 
(fBSL,NATURAL,i,t + fBSL,HARVEST,i,t + fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t)]  
(17c) 
where: 
ABSL,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i;  
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
20 
LBBSL,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t. LBBSL,i,t is calculated for year, t, beginning 
with biomass estimates in year t=1 (the project start year) and with annual biomass increments (GBSL,i,t) added as 
per calculations in equation 5 a, b. This value is then multiplied by ABSL,i, the area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i.   
Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i (see equation 5b). 
fBSL,NATURAL,i,t = the annual proportion of biomass that dies from natural mortality in polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fNATURALi 
< 1), year, t (see equation 7), 
fBSL,HARVEST,i,t = the proportion of biomass removed by harvesting from polygon, i, (unitless; 0 < fHARVESTIi < 1), year, t 
(see equation 8),  
fBSL,DAMAGE,i,t  = the proportion of additional biomass removed or road and landing construction in polygon, i 
(unitless; 0 < fDAMAGE,i,t < 1), year, t (see equation 9) 
DBGBSL,OUT,i,t = DBGBSL,i,t ● fBSL,dgbDECAY,i,t 
(17d) 
where: 
DBGBSL,i,t = the total quantity of dead belowground in polygon i, year, t (see equation 17b).  
fBSL,dgbDECAY,i,t = the annual proportional loss of dead belowground biomass due to decay, in polygon i, year, t 
(unitless; ; 0 < fBSL,lwDECAY,i,t < 1). The ex ante estimation of the decay of dead belowground biomass should be 
done using a similar single exponent decay function as that described above for lying deadwood biomass. 
Estimates for the decay parameter appropriate for specific project should be derived from peer-reviewed literature 
(see for example: (Moore, Trofymow, Siltanen, Prescott, & CIDET, 2005)); Melin et al. (2009); (Melin, Petersson, & 
Nordfjell, 2009)). 
8.1.6 
Harvested Wood Products  
This methodology considers the net emissions and carbon storage related to: 
a. Wood products created from harvested logs removed from the project site,  
b. The fossil fuel emissions from equipment and facilities involved in the harvesting, transportation, 
and processing of wood products.   
The annual change emissions associated with the production of harvested wood products (HWP), ∆CBSl,HWP,t, is 
calculated as: 
∆CBSl,HWP,t = ∆CBSL,STORHWP,t  – ∆CBSL,EMITFOSSIL,t, 
(18) 
∆CBSL,STORHWP,t = the annual change in harvested carbon that remains in storage after conversion to wood products 
(t C yr-1) 
∆CBSL,EMITFOSSIL,t = the annual change in fossil fuel emissions from harvesting (logging and log transport) and 
processing of the various wood products.  
 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
21 
8.1.7 
Carbon storage in harvested wood products (∆CBSL,STORHWP,t)  
In accordance with the VCS AFOLU requirements (Version 3)21, emissions of carbon stored within harvested wood 
products in IFM projects must be modeled based upon the following criteria: 
a) For short-term wood products and wood waste that would decay within 3 years, all carbon must be 
assumed to be lost immediately. 
b) For medium-term wood products that are retired between 3 and 100 years, a 20-year linear decay 
function must be applied. 
c) For long-term wood products that are considered permanent (ie, carbon is stored for 100 years or 
more), it may be assumed no carbon is released. 
The annual change in carbon storage in harvested wood products in year t (∆CBSL,STORHWP,t; t C yr-1) is determined 
based upon the following equation: 
∆CBSL,STORHWP,t = (CBSL,STORHWP,t2 - CBSL,STORHWP,t1) / T 
(19) 
 
where: 
CBSL,STORHWP,t2 = carbon storage in harvested wood products at t=2; t C 
CBSL,STORHWP,t1 = carbon storage in harvested wood products at t=1; t C 
T = number of years between monitoring t1 and t2 
t : 1,2,3…t years elapsed since the project start date 
 
For applications within North America this methodology has adapted data from the Forestry Appendix of the 
Technical Guidelines of the US Department of Energy’s Voluntary Reporting of Greenhouse Gases Program 
(known as Section 1605(b))22 to calculate proportions in use for the short-term and long-term wood products, from 
which a remaining medium-term wood product pool can be calculated and decayed over a 20-year period.  In the 
case where the methodology is applied outside of North America, the project proponent must utilize regionally 
appropriate data from a peer-reviewed source to complete the steps below.  Alternatively, a globally applicable 
method such as that defined by Winjum et al. (1998)23 may be utilized to estimate carbon storage in wood 
products.. 
Storage in the harvested wood products pool at a given time t (CBSL,STORHWP,t; t C) is calculated according to the 
following steps for each harvest period h: 
Step 1 (Carbon contained in harvested timber): Determine the carbon contained within harvested timber 
removed from the project landbase. This can be calculated from measures of total merchantable volume 
generated during the harvest period h using species-specific wood densities and standard carbon conversions or 
                                              
21 In previous versions, this methodology used the “100 Year Method” following procedures developed by Miner (Miner, 2006), which have 
been replaced by the updated methods outlined in this revised version to ensure compliance with version 3.2 of the AFOLU Requirements.  
22 http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/Forestryappendix[1].pdf Also available as a US Forest Service General Technical Report at: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/ne/durham/4104/papers/ne_gtr343.pdf 
23 Winjum, J.K., Brown, S. and Schlamadinger, B. 1998. Forest harvests and wood products: sources and sinks of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
Forest Science 44: 272-284 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
22 
estimated from live biomass removals after accounting for removal of belowground components, branches, and 
bucking losses (equation 20). In accordance with the 1605(b) approach, the harvested wood carbon (CBSL,TIMBER,h) 
must be divided into the following product type (k) categories: 1) softwood saw log, 2) softwood pulpwood, 3) 
hardwood saw log, 4) hardwood pulpwood.  This can be done using local data if available or estimated based upon 
region and forest type according to Table 1.4 in the 1605(b) document. Table 3 provides recommendations for 
analogs for areas within North America but outside of the conterminous US; however, the project proponent must 
justify the appropriateness of the selected analog . In the case of global project locations outside of North America, 
the project proponent must identify and justify the use of alternative data from peer-reviewed sources. 
CBSL,TIMBER,h = Σ[(LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,h - LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,h ● Ri + LBLBSL,OTHER,i,h -  
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,h ● Ri) ● (1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,h) ● (1 - fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,h)] ●  
● CF 
(20) 
where: 
CBSL,TIMBER,h= carbon contained in timber harvested in period h (summed for all harvested polygons, i); t C  
LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,h = annual removal of live tree biomass due to commercial felling in polygon, i; t d.m. (equation 8) 
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,h = annual removal of live tree biomass from incidental sources in polygon, i; t d.m. (equation 9) 
Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i (see equation 5b). 
1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,h the proportion of live tree biomass remaining after netting out branch biomass, in polygon i 
(unitless; 0 < fBRANCH,i,t < 1)(see equation 12) 
1 - fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,h = the proportion of the log bole remaining after in-woods log processing/bucking for quality, 
length, etc., in polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fBUCKINGLOSS,i,t < 1) (equation 12) 
h = harvest period ; yr 
 
Step 2: (Carbon contained in harvested timber after milling): Determine the total carbon in harvested timber 
that will enter the wood products pool by product type accounting for mill efficiencies and estimated product 
disposition percentages (CBSL,MILL,h; t C). The gross quantity of carbon contained in harvested timber for each of the 
four product types described in Step 1 must be decremented to account for losses during processing (equation 
21).  These losses including bark and other milling wastes and may be determined using local data or estimated 
based upon region and product type according to Table 1.5 in the 1605(b) document. Table 3 provides 
recommendations for analogs for areas within North America but outside of the conterminous US; however, the 
project proponent must justify the appropriateness of the selected analog. In the case of global project locations 
outside of North America, the project proponent must identify and justify the use of alternative data from peer-
reviewed sources.). 
 
CBSL,MILL,h,k =  (CBSL,TIMBER,h,k ● fRND,k ● rRND,k) 
 
 
 
 
 
(21) 
 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
23 
where: 
CBSL,MILL,h,k = carbon contained in harvested timber after milling in period h, for product type k; t C 
CBSL,TIMBER,h,k = carbon contained in timber harvested in period h, for product type k; t C  
k = wood product type – (softwood saw log, softwood pulpwood, hardwood saw log, or hardwood pulpwood; 
proportions determined from Table 1.4 of 1605(b) document) 
fRND,k = fraction of growing stock volume removed as roundwood for product type k (default values by region in 
Table 1.5 of the 1605(b) document); dimensionless 
rRND,k = ratio of industrial roundwood to growing stock volume removed as roundwood for product type k (default 
values by region in Table 1.5 of the 1605(b) document); dimensionless 
 
Step 3: (Carbon storage in medium-term and long-term wood products): Calculate the total carbon lost in 
short-lived products and stored in medium-term and long-term products.  For each harvest period h, carbon stored 
in harvested wood products of a defined type (k) after accounting for milling losses (CBSL,MILL,h,k) must be 
apportioned into one of the following categories: 
a) Short lived wood products: harvested wood products and wood waste that will decay within 3 years. 
b) Medium lived wood products: harvested wood products and wood waste that will be retired between 3 
and 100 years from the date of harvest. 
c) Long lived wood products: harvested wood products and wood waste that may be considered 
permanent (stored for 100 years or more). 
To determine the proportion of harvested wood products (by type) that fall into each category, refer to the “In Use” 
column for the selected forest region in Table 1.6 in the 1605(b) document. Table 3 provides recommendations for 
analogs for areas within North America but outside of the conterminous UShowever,. the project proponent must 
justify the appropriateness of the selected analog at project validation. In the case of global project locations 
outside of North America, the project proponent must identify and justify the use of alternative data from peer-
reviewed sourcesTable 3   
Three values are then calculated from these data selected from Table 1.6 in the 1605(b) document, for each 
product type, k : the short-lived fraction (PBSL,SLF,k), medium-lived fraction (PBSL,MLF,k), and long-lived fraction 
(PBSL,LLF,k): 
PBSL,SLF,k = 1-P3-year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(22a) 
PBSL,LLF,k = P100-year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(22b) 
PBSL,MLF,k = P3-year – P100-year , 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(22c) 
Each category of wood products (k) stores carbon according to the following rules: 
i. 
Short-lived wood products – immediate emission of all carbon upon harvest 
ii. 
Medium-lived wood products – no emission of carbon upon harvest, but carbon stored will decrease 
by 1/20th for the next 20 years after harvest, such that after 20 years the term becomes zero 
iii. 
Long-lived wood products – no loss of carbon. 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
24 
Thus, carbon storage in harvested wood products at time t may be calculated using a cohort approach in which 
medium-term and long-term wood products from each harvest period h are tracked independently and then 
summed over the project time period as indicated in equation 23. 
 
CBSL,STORHWP,t, = Σ Σ (( CBSL,MILL,h,k ● PLLF,k) + [(CBSL,MILL,h,k● PMLF,k) ● ((20-h) / 20)]) 
(23) 
 
 
where: 
CBSL,STORHWP,t, = carbon stored in harvested wood products in year t summed for all product types k and then over 
all harvest periods h; t C  
k = wood product type – (softwood saw log, softwood pulpwood, hardwood saw log, or hardwood pulpwood; 
proportions determined from Table 1.4 of 1605(b) document) 
h = year of harvest (the term (20-h) should not be allowed to drop below 0) 
 
Table 3 – Recommended analogous Regional 1605b Data Substitutions for regions for North America, 
outside the conterminous U.S. 
Region 
Regional analog1 
Coastal British Columbia and Coastal 
Alaska 
Pacific Northwest, West 
Columbia (British Columbia) 
Pacific Northwest, East 
Alpine and Montane (Rocky Mountain 
region in British Columbia and Alberta) 
Rocky Mountain, North 
Boreal (across Canada) and Interior Alaska 
Northern Lake States 
Great Lakes St-Lawrence (central Canada) 
Northern Lake States 
Carolinian (southwestern Ontario) and 
Acadian (Maritimes) 
Northeast 
1 As per Table 1.6 of the 1605(b) methodology document (see text) 
8.1.8 
Fossil fuel emissions associated with logging, transport, and manufacture  
The annual change in fossil fuel emissions from harvesting and processing of the various wood products 
(∆CBSL,EMITFOSSIL,t ) are calculated as: 
CBSL,EMITFOSSIL,t = CBSL,EMITHARVEST,t + CBSL,EMITMANUFACTURE,t + CBSL,EMITTRANSPORT,t 
(24) 
where: 
CBSL,EMITHARVEST,t is the annual fossil fuel emissions associated with harvesting of raw material (t C yr-1) 
CBSL,EMITMANUFACTURE,t is the annual fossil fuel emissions associated with the manufacturing of raw material (t C yr-1) 
CBSL,EMITTRANSPORT,t is the annual fossil fuel emissions associated with the transport of raw material (t C yr-1) 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
25 
The simplest approach to calculating CBSL,EMITFOSSIL,t is to use published or derived carbon emission intensity 
factors. In the case of harvesting, BSL,CEMITHARVEST,t; t C yr-1), can be calculated (summed across harvested 
polygons)as: 
CBSL,EMITHARVEST,t = Σ[(LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t -  
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 – fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
CF ● cHARVEST 
(25) 
where: 
cHARVEST is the carbon emission intensity factor (t C emitted/t C raw material) associated with harvesting (see Table 
4 for default values); all other terms are as defined in equation 20. 
CBSL,EMITTRANSPORT,t must be calculated after consideration of the transport distance from harvest to processing 
facility, and the means of transportation. This term can be calculated as follows (after (Heath, et al., 2010)): 
CBSL,EMITTRANSPORT,t = Σ[(LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri +  
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t - LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 – fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
CF ● Σ(fBSL,TRANSPORTk ● dTRANSPORTk ● cTRANSPORTk) 
(26) 
where: 
fBSL,TRANSPORTk = the fraction of raw material transported by transportation type, k. (unitless; 0 < fBSL,TRANSPORTk < 1). 
dTRANSPORTk = the distance transported by transportation type, k. (km); 
cTRANSPORTk is the carbon emission intensity factor (kg C emitted/t C raw material) associated with transportation 
type, k (see Table 4 for default values); all other terms are as defined in equation 20. 
CBSL,EMITMANUFACTURE,t = Σ[(LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t -  
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t ● Ri) ●  (1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 - fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
Σ(fBSL,PRODUCTk ● cMANUFACTUREk) ● CF 
(27) 
cMANUFACTUREk is the carbon emission intensity factor (t C emitted/t C raw material) associated with manufacture of 
product type, k; all other terms are as defined in equation 19. 
Default values for cMANUFACTUREk are provided in Table 4. Data are from a comprehensive analysis conducted in 
Finland (Pingoud, Perälä, Soimakallio, & Pussinen, 2003).  Higher comparative values from North America are 
provided for harvesting and sawnwood manufacturing to illustrate inherent variability. Project proponents may use 
the default values in Table 4, or substitute regional data, if available. 
 
 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
26 
Table 4 –Carbon emission intensity factors for harvesting, the manufacture of various product categories, 
k, and for various transportation categories, k. 
Activity 
Value 
Reference 
Other (for comparison) 
Harvesting (cHARVEST)  (t C emitted/t C raw material) 
Clearcut harvest 
0.016 
(Zhang, Cormier, Lyng, Mabee, Ogino, 
& McLean, 2010) 
 
Manufacturing (cMANUFACTUREk) (t C emitted/t C raw material) 
Sawnwood 
0.04 
(Pingoud & Lehtila, 2002) – Calculated 
from Table I & III  
0.1 (western US), 0.156 
(southern US) (Milota, West, 
& Hartley, 2005) 
Veneer, plywood and 
structural panels 
0.06 
(Pingoud & Lehtila, 2002) – Calculated 
from Table I & III  
 
Non-structural panels 
0.12 
(Pingoud & Lehtila, 2002) – Calculated 
from Table I & III  
 
Paper 
 
(Pingoud & Lehtila, 2002) – Calculated 
from Table I & III  
 
Mechanical pulping 
0.48 
(Pingoud & Lehtila, 2002) – Calculated 
from Table I & III  
 
Chemical pulping 
0.13 
(Pingoud & Lehtila, 2002) – Calculated 
from Table I & III  
 
Transportation (cTRANSPORTk) (t C emitted/t C raw material ● km) 
Truck 
7.0*10-5 
(Heath, et al., 2010) - From Supporting 
Information Table S16 
 
Rail 
8.2*10-6 
(Heath, et al., 2010) - From Supporting 
Information Table S16 
 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
Net project emissions are calculated by repeating the procedures in Section 8.1 (Baseline Emissions), using the 
project scenario polygons, data, and modeling.  Unless otherwise noted and justified by the project proponent, all 
modeling methods, calculations, assumptions, and data sources should be consistent in both the baseline and 
project scenarios, with the exception of ex-post monitoring data as outlined below.  For purposes of efficacy, it may 
be advantageous to re-stratify the landbase for the project scenario, as compared to the baseline.   
Within this methodology, it is anticipated that project scenarios may undertake ongoing low levels of management 
activities for forest maintenance, ecological enhancement, and/or risk mitigation (for example, pest management, 
salvage, etc.).  In order to comply with the IFM-LtPF project type and this methodology, these activities must meet 
the following requirements: 
1. All net GHG emissions from project activities must be modeled and accounted for in the project scenario in 
the same manner as the baseline scenario. 
2. Project activities cannot remove > 20% of the harvesting volume projected in the baseline scenario over 
an equivalent 10-year period.   
3. Project proponents must be able to demonstrate that activities: 
a. have a conservation benefit and are consistent with principles of managing for biodiversity, 
ecosystem function, and carbon retention.   
b. are related to restoration, ecological management, or emissions risk reduction 
If a project scenario has no planned timber removals, then all related equations in the project emissions 
calculations in Section 8.2 can be set to zero.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
27 
If the project scenario has planned activities other than those involving the removal of timber that affect non-de 
minimis levels of carbon stock, the project must document these activities, reasonably calculate their carbon 
impacts, and include these emissions in the total carbon calculations for the project scenario.   
All calculations in this methodology represent annualized net changes in carbon stocks by polygon, which must 
therefore be summed across the project activity area to determine the annual total net emissions and reductions.   
Note, additional details for many calculations, including references and background are provided within the 
equivalent Baseline Emissions section. 
8.2.1 
Project Scenario Area Stratification 
The project scenario will utilize the same methods and steps to create polygons as outlined for the baseline 
scenario (see Section 8.1) from APRJ,I.  However, the project scenario may be stratified differently to accommodate 
different project management activities and/or changes to inventory data resulting from ex-post monitoring (if new 
polygons are created as the result of natural disturbance events, for example). There may be differences between 
the project and baseline scenarios in the areas within the landbase that are eligible for specific forest management 
activities (i.e., the assumptions used to determine the THLB may differ in the project scenario relative to the 
baseline). However, the underlying inventory and data assumptions must be the same in the baseline and project 
scenarios.   
8.2.2 
Determining Actual Onsite Carbon Stocks 
Actual carbon stocks must be calculated prior to each verification, or at a maximum interval of 5 years, by updating 
the project’s forest carbon inventory from the monitoring data.  
This is done by: 
1. Incorporating any new forest inventory data (including data from new or re-measured sampling plots and other 
monitored data, as outlined in Section 9.2 and 9.3) obtained during the previous year into the inventory 
estimate.  
2. Updating the forest inventory for spatial monitoring results, including annual project activities and/or 
disturbances that have occurred during the monitoring period. 
3. Using the selected model(s) to project prior-year data from the forest inventory to the current reporting year (as 
described in Section 8.2.5).  
4. Comparing estimates of live biomass and dead organic matter in polygons and calculated from monitoring 
activities (Section 9.2 and 9.3) against current-year modeled values in the project scenario (see Section 8.2.4). 
5. Making calibration adjustments to models and/or parameters such that the fit between the equivalent modeled 
and measured variables meets targets (as per Section 8.2.4). 
6. If any changes are made to the model assumptions or parameters used in Section 8.2, the calculation of 
baseline emissions (from the current date forward) must be redone using the updated model(s) and parameter 
sets. 
7. Calculate the error terms for use in determining the uncertainty factor (Section 8.5.3).   
8.2.3 
Ex-Post Calculations of Carbon Stocks 
Actual (ex post) annual net carbon stocks are calculated using the equations in this section. 
CACTUAL,i,t = CLB,i,t + CDOM,i,t 
(28a) 
where: 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
28 
CACTUAL,i,t = carbon stocks in all selected carbon pools in polygon, i, year, t; t C  
CLB,i,t = carbon stocks in living tree biomass in polygon, i, year, t; t C  
CDOM,i,t = carbon stocks in dead organic matter in year, t; t C 
Live biomass 
Average aboveground biomass for measured polygon, i, in year, t (BAG,i,t) is determined by converting the 
aboveground, tree-level measurements (kg biomass per tree) described in Section 9.3.2 to area-based, stand-level 
measurements (t ha-1). This is achieved by summing the aboveground biomass of all the trees within a sample 
plot, converting kg to t, and then dividing the sum by the plot area in ha.  All plots within a particular polygon should 
be averaged to get an average estimate of stand-level aboveground biomass (t ha-1). Once the average 
aboveground biomass has been determined for each measured polygon, belowground biomass is estimated by 
multiplying the aboveground biomass by the root:shoot ratio, Ri (equation 28d) and the two are summed to 
determine total stand-level live biomass for measured polygon i, time t, (BTOTAL,i,t). Ri is described in Section 8.1.3. 
Finally, the average measured carbon stock in living tree biomass for measured polygon i, time t, (CLB,i,t) is 
calculated as shown in equation 28c. This value of CLB,i,t must be compared to the equivalent calculation of live 
biomass (LBPRJ,i,t) calculated in the project scenario (Section 8.2.5) (see comparison method and steps below). 
BTOTAL,i,t = (BAG,i,t + BBG,i,t) 
(28b) 
CLB,i,t = (BTOTAL,i,t) ● CF 
(28c) 
where:  
BAG,i,t = aboveground tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) measured in polygon, i, year, t  
BBG,i,t = belowground tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) measured in polygon, i, year, t. 
BTOTAL,i,t = total tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) measured in polygon, i, year, t 
BBG,i,t = BAG,i,t ● Ri 
(28d) 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5)  
Dead organic matter 
Carbon stored in dead organic matter pools in measured polygon, i, year t, (CDOM,i,t) is calculated as the sum of 
that stored in lying dead wood and standing snags. 
CDOM,i,t = (DOMLDW,i,t + DOMSNAG,i,t) ● CF 
(28e) 
where:  
DOMLDW,i,t = average mass of dead organic matter contained in lying dead wood (t d.m. ha-1) in measured in 
polygon, i, year, t  
DOMSNAG,i,t = average mass of dead organic matter contained in standing snags (t d.m. ha-1) in measured in 
polygon, i, year, t  
The average quantity of dead organic matter contained in lying dead wood for measured polygon, i, in year, t 
(DOMLDW,i,t) is calculated according to equations 60a-c in Section 9.3.2. The value of DOMLDW,i,t must be compared 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
29 
to the equivalent  calculation of lying dead wood mass (LDWPRJ,i,t) in the project scenario (Section 8.2.8) (see 
comparison method and steps below). 
The average quantity of dead organic matter contained in standing snags for measured polygon, i, in year, t 
(DOMSNAG,i,t is calculated by summing the mass (aboveground only) of all the measured standing dead trees within 
a sample plot (converting kg to t) and dividing the sum by the plot area in ha (see Section 9.3.2).  The 
belowground component of snags is treated as dead belowground biomass (see Section 8.2.8) and is not directly 
measured. All plots within a particular polygon should be averaged to get an average estimate of DOMSNAG,i,t. The 
value of DOMSNAG,i,t must be compared to the equivalent calculation of standing dead tree mass (SNAGPRJ,i,t) in the 
project scenario (Section 8.2.8) (see comparison method and steps below).  
8.2.4 
Updating the Modeled Project Carbon Balance 
In this methodology, the ex ante carbon balances in the project case may be derived from computer model output. 
In this event, the precision of the modeled carbon stocks should be evaluated for each polygon or analysis unit 
(depending on the level of stratification used) using the method described for determining mean model error in 
Section 8.5.3 (equations 60a,b). If the model error term is too high (> 10%), proponents should attempt to improve 
the model fit by re-evaluating and adjusting model parameters until model error term is < 10%.  Model error terms 
greater than 10% (after model adjustments) will be penalized according the calculation of the uncertainty factor 
described in Section 8.5.3. If changes in model assumptions or parameters are made, the baseline scenario (from 
the next year forward) must be recalculated using the revised model. 
8.2.5 
Calculating the Project Carbon Balance 
The total annual carbon balance in year, t, for the project scenario is calculated as (∆CPRJ,t, in t C yr-1):  
∆CPRJ,t = ∆CPRJ,P,t 
(29) 
where: 
∆CPRJ,P,t is the annual change in carbon stocks in all pools in the project across the project activity area; t C yr-1 . 
∆CPRJ,P,t = ∆CPRJ,LB,t + ∆CPRJ,DOM,t + ∆CPRJ,HWP,t 
(30) 
∆CPRJ,LB,t = annual change in carbon stocks in living tree biomass (above- and belowground); t C yr-1  
∆CPRJ,DOM,t = annual change in carbon stocks in dead organic matter; t C yr-1 
∆CPRJ,HWP,t is the annual change in carbon stocks associated with harvested wood products, t C yr-1.   
∆CPRJ,LB,t = ∆CPRJ,G,t – ∆CPRJ,L,t 
(31) 
where: 
∆CPRJ,G,t = annual increase in tree carbon stock from growth; t C yr-1 
∆CPRJ,L,t = annual decrease in tree carbon stock from a reduction in live biomass; t C yr-1.  
If the project area has been stratified, carbon pools are calculated for each polygon, i, and then summed during a 
given year, t.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
30 
8.2.6 
Live Biomass Gain 
Live biomass gain in year, t, polygon, i (∆CPRJ,G,i.t) is calculated as:  
∆CPRJ,G,t = Σ(APRJ,i ● GPRJ,i,t) ● CF 
(32) 
where: 
APRJ,i, = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i;  
GPRJ,i,t = annual increment rate in tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1 yr-1), in polygon, i, and; 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter t C t-1 d.m. (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
GPRJ,i,t = GPRJ,AG,i,t + GPRJ,BG,i,t 
(33a) 
where GPRJ,AG,i,t and GPRJ,BG,i,t are the annual above- and belowground biomass increment rates (t d.m. ha-1 yr-1); 
GPRJ,BG,i,t = GPRJ,AG,i,t ● Ri 
(33b) 
where Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i. Ri should ideally be estimated for each polygon, but these data are 
difficult to derive empirically. Hence, general relationships are acceptable (Cairns, 1997). 
Equations 32 and 33 can be used directly to calculate ∆CPRJ,G,t when all tree cover within a polygon is removed by 
harvesting (i.e., clearfelling) and no residual structure is retained. In cases of partial harvesting and/or multiple 
entries into a polygon, these equations must be applied separately to each of the resulting sub-polygons (the 
different age classes that are created). This ensures that growth rates reflect the difference in forest age between 
the sub-polygons. 
The ex ante and ex post calculation of GPRJ,i,t (either directly, or from its component parts) will be derived from 
models that require inputs derived, in part, from forest inventory data updated from monitoring sample plots (see 
Sections 9.3.2 and 8.2.2). Criteria for model suitability are provided in 8.1.1. The exact form of the input data 
depends on the nature of the model but may include site index, species composition, and volume (see notes in 
Section 8.1).   
8.2.7 
Live Biomass Loss 
The annual decrease in aboveground tree carbon from live biomass loss (∆CPRJ,L,t; t C yr-1) is the sum of losses 
from: 
1. Natural mortality (i.e. insects, disease, competition, wind, etc.) 
2. Commercial round wood felling  
3. Incidental sources.   
Losses must be specific to a given polygon; each polygon must be summed in order to calculate total annual loss 
across the project activity area. The live biomass losses are not emitted directly, but rather are transferred to dead 
organic matter pools.  
∆CPRJ,L,t = Σ(LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t + LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t + LBLPRJ,OTHERi,t) ● CF 
(34) 
where: 
LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t = annual loss of live tree biomass due to natural mortality in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
31 
LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t = annual loss of live tree biomass due to commercial felling in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t = annual loss of live tree biomass from incidental sources in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter; t C t-1 d.m. (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t = APRJ,i ● LBPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t  
(35)24 
where  
APRJ,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i;  
LBPRJ,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t  
LBPRJ,i,t is calculated for year, t, beginning with biomass estimates in year t=1 (the project start year) and with 
annual biomass increments (GPRJ,i,t) added as per calculations in equation 33a.  
fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t = the annual proportion of biomass that dies from natural mortality in forest type , i (unitless; 0 < 
fPRJ,NATURALi < 1), year, t. Tree mortality is an ongoing process during stand development. Trees die as a 
consequence of insect attack, disease, competition, or some combination thereof. Hence, mortality can be highly 
variable between years. This parameter can be applied uniformly across an analysis unit, or individually to a given 
polygon. Ex post estimates from regional data sources in corresponding stand types are preferred. Sources for 
mortality estimates include permanent sample plots in similar stand types, literature reports, and inventory data. 
Some models (the FORECAST model, for example) simulate annual background mortality rates directly and can 
accommodate variable age structures following partial harvesting. 
LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t = APRJ,i ● LBPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t  
(36) 
where: 
APRJ,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i 
LBPRJ,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t (see equation 7 for its calculation). 
fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t = the proportion of biomass removed by harvesting from polygon, i, (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,HARVESTIi < 1), in 
year, t. Data for this variable should be obtained from harvest schedule information. Values may be constrained by 
(a) the value of fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t (i.e., fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t < 1- fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t), and/or (b) the area of timber available for 
commercial harvest. 
Incidental loss (LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t; t d.m. yr-1) is the additional live tree biomass removed for road and landing 
construction in the polygon, i, and is calculated as a proportion of biomass removed by harvesting:  
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t = APRJ,i ● LBPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t ● fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t 
(37) 
where: 
APRJ,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i; 
LBPRJ,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t  
                                              
24 Note, for Equation 35, 36, and 37:  (fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t + fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t + fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t) ≤ 1.0 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
32 
fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t = the proportion of biomass removed by harvesting from polygon, i, in year, t (unitless; 0 < 
fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t < 1).   
fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t  = the proportion of additional biomass removed for road and landing construction in polygon, i, year, t 
(unitless; 0 < fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t < 1)25. Data for this variable should be based on regional and local comparative studies 
and experiential information derived from the local forest industry26.   
8.2.8 
Dead Organic Matter Dynamics (∆CPRJ,DOM) 
Dead organic matter (DOM) included in this methodology comprises three components: standing dead wood 
(minimum > 5 cm DBH and 1.3 m height; termed snags), lying dead wood (minimum > 5 cm DBH; LDW), and 
belowground dead wood (i.e., dead roots). Standing dead wood is < 45º of vertical, while lying dead wood is > 45º 
of vertical.  
The annual change in carbon stocks in DOM (∆CPRJ,DOM; t C yr-1) is calculated as: 
∆CPRJ,DOM,t = ∆CPRJ,LDW,t + ∆CPRJ,SNAG,t + ∆CPRJ,DBG,t 
(38) 
where: 
∆CPRJ,LDW,t = change in lying dead wood (LDW) carbon stocks in year, t; t C yr-1 
∆CPRJ,SNAG,t = change in snag carbon stock in year, t; t C yr-1 
∆CBSL,DBG,t = change in belowground carbon stock in year, t; t C yr-1. 
∆CPRJ,LDW,t = Σ(LDWPRJ,IN,i,t – LDWPRJ,OUT,i,t) ● CF 
(39a) 
LDWPRJ,i,t+1 = LDWPRJ,i,t + (LDWPRJ,IN,i,t – LDWPRJ,OUT,i,t) 
(39b) 
where: 
LDWPRJ,i,t= The total mass of lying dead wood accumulated in polygon i at time t (t d.m.). 
LDWPRJ,IN,i,t = annual increase in LDW biomass for polygon i, year, t (t d.m ha-1 yr-1). LDW increases occur as a 
result of natural mortality (typically, blowdown), and as a direct or indirect result of harvesting. 
LDWPRJ,OUT,i,t = annual loss in LDW biomass through decay, for polygon i, year, t, (t d.m ha-1 yr-1) 
LDWPRJ,IN,i,t and LDWPRJ,OUT,i,t are summed across polygons. 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
LDWPRJ,IN,i,t = (LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t - LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t ● Ri) ● fPRJ,BLOWDOWN,i,t +  
((LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t – LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri) +  
(LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t - LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t ● Ri)) ● fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t +  
                                              
25 Projecting ex ante road and landing removals beyond a few years is difficult and complex.  As described, fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t functions 
as a proxy for estimating biomass impacts of all new roads and landings associated with annual harvesting in polygon, i.  
Project proponents can simulate LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t directly, if appropriate models are available.   
26 fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t may be zero or de minimis in cases where a polygon is already roaded.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
33 
((LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t – LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri) +  
(LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t - LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t ● Ri)) ●  
(1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t ) ● fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t + SNAGPRJ,,i,t ● fPRJ,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t 
(40) 
where: 
LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t, LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t, and LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t are as calculated in equations 35, 36, and 37, respectively. 
Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i (see equation 33b). 
fPRJ,BLOWDOWN,i,t = the annual proportion of live aboveground tree biomass subject to blowdown in polygon, i, year, t 
(unitless; 0 < fPRJ,BLOWDOWN,i,t < 1). Ex ante estimates must be derived from regional reports in similar forest types. 
fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t = the annual proportion of aboveground tree biomass comprised of branches > 5 cm diameter in 
polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t < 1). Ex ante data are available from allometric equations and models (for 
example, (Kurz & Apps, 2006) for Canada; (Smith, Miles, Vissage, & Pugh, 2004) for the U.S.). In the event slash 
burning is undertaken, this parameter should be reduced accordingly to reflect the proportion of biomass 
remaining. Estimates should be obtained from expert opinion; as a default, assume 100% consumption. 
fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t = the annual proportion of the log bole biomass left on site after assessing and/or merchandizing 
the log bole for quality, in polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t < 1). Preferably, data for this variable must be 
based on regional and local comparative studies and experiential information derived from the local forest industry. 
Otherwise, an average default value of 21% can be used, based on US national summary statistics (Smith, Miles, 
Vissage, & Pugh, 2004). 
SNAGPRJ,i,t = the total mass of the snag pool in polygon, i, year, t (see equation 42b). 
fPRJ,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t = the annual proportion of snag biomass in polygon, i, year, t, that falls over and thus is 
transferred to the LDW pool (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t < 1). Ex ante estimates for this parameter can be 
derived from peer reviewed literature (for example, (Parish, Antos, Ott, & Di Lucca, 2010) and forest carbon 
accounting models that track the rates of input and losses from dead organic matter pools (for example, (Kurz & et 
al, 2009). 
 
LDWPRJ,OUT,i,t = LDWPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,lwDECAY,i,t 
(41) 
where: 
LDWPRJ,i,t = the total amount of lying deadwood mass in polygon i, year, t (see equation 39b). fPRJ,lwDECAY,i,t = the 
annual proportional loss of lying dead biomass due to decay, in polygon i, year, t (unitless; ; 0 < fPRJ,lwDECAY,i,t < 1). 
A common approach to ex ante estimation of fPRJ,lwDECAY,i,t is to assume mass loss occurs in proportion to the 
amount of mass remaining in accordance with an a single exponential model, of the general form: 
Yt = Yo e–kt 
where Yo is the initial quantity of material, Yt the amount left at time t, and k is a decay constant (Harmon, et al., 
1986). Other types of exponential models are available (reviewed in (Harmon, et al., 1986)) and may be more 
appropriate to particular forest types (to be described and justified by the project proponent, if used). Ex ante 
estimates for the decay parameter appropriate for the project should be derived from peer-reviewed literature (for 
example, (Harmon, et al., 1986); (Laiho & and Prescott, 2004); (Harmon et al, 2008)).   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
34 
The change in standing dead wood (snag) carbon stock in year, t (t C yr-1) is calculated as: 
∆CPRJ,SNAG,t = Σ(SNAGPRJ,IN,i,t – SNAGPRJ,OUT,i,t) ● CF 
(42a) 
SNAGPRJ,i,t+1 = SNAGPRJ,i,t + (SNAGPRJ,IN,i,t – SNAGPRJ,OUT,i,t) 
(42b) 
where: 
SNAGPRJ,i,t  = The total mass of snags accumulated in polygon i at time t (t d.m.) 
SNAGPRJ,IN,i,t = annual gain in snag biomass for polygon i, year, t (t d.m ha-1 yr-1). Snag biomass develops as a 
result of natural mortality. In cases where snags are created through management activities, these should be 
accounted for here. 
SNAGPRJ,OUT,i,t = annual loss in snag biomass through decay, or falldown (i.e, transfer to the LDW pool)(t d.m ha-1 
yr-1) 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5). 
Note that SNAGPRJ,IN,i,t and SNAGPRJ,OUT,i,t are summed across polygons. 
SNAGPRJ,IN,i,t = (LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t - LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fPRJ,BLOWDOWN,i,t) 
(43) 
where: 
LBLPRJ,NATURALi,t is as calculated in equation 35, and 
1 - fPRJ,BLOWDOWN,i,t is the proportion of live tree aboveground biomass that dies in polygon, i, year, t, but remains as 
standing dead organic matter (i.e. snags) (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,BLOWDOWN,i,t < 1). Ex ante default estimates for this 
calculation can be derived from literature values (for example (Harmon, et al., 1986); (Runkle, 2000); (Harmon et 
al, 2008)) and should be matched to the ecosystems that most closely characterize the project area. 
SNAGPRJ,OUT,i,t = SNAGPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,SWDECAY,i,t + SNAGPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t 
(44) 
where: 
SNAGPRJ,i,t = the total amount of snag mass in polygon i, year, t (see equation 42b). fPRJ,SWDECAY,i,t  = the annual 
proportional loss of snag biomass due to decay, in polygon, i, year, t (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,SWDECAY,i,t < 1). As with lying 
dead wood, a common approach to estimating fPRJ,SWDECAY,i,t is to assume mass loss occurs in proportion to the 
amount of mass remaining in accordance with an a single exponential model (see equation 41). Ex ante estimates 
for this parameter can be derived from peer reviewed literature appropriate for the project site (for example, 
Vanderwel et al. 2006a) and forest carbon accounting models that track the rates of input and losses from dead 
organic matter pools for each forest type, productivity, and age-class (see, for example, Vanderwel et al., 2006b; 
(Kurz & et al, 2009)).  
fPRJ,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t = the annual proportion of snag biomass in polygon, i, that falls over and thus is transferred to 
the LDW pool (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,SNAGFALLDOWN,i,t < 1). See equation 40 for parameter estimates. 
The annual change in DOM derived from dead belowground biomass (∆CPRJ,DBG, ,t; t C yr-1) is calculated for each 
polygon as per equation 45a. Calculation of ∆CPRJ,DBG,t is specific to a given polygon; each polygon must therefore 
be summed in order to calculate total annual loss across the project activity area. 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
35 
∆CPRJ,DBG,t = Σ(DBGPRJ,IN,i,t – DBGPRJ,OUT,i,t) ● CF 
(45a) 
DBGPRJ,i,t+1 = DBGPRJ,i,t + (DBGPRJ,IN,i,t – DBGPRJ,OUT,i,t) 
(45b) 
where: 
DGBPRJ,i,t  = The total quantity of dead belowground biomass accumulated in polygon i at time t (t d.m.). 
DBGPRJ,IN,i,t = annual gain in dead belowground biomass for polygon i, year, t (t d.m ha-1 yr-1). Dead belowground 
biomass develops as a result of mortality through natural causes or through harvesting activities.  
DBGPRJ,OUT,i,t = annual loss in dead belowground biomass through decay, (t d.m ha-1 yr-1) 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5). 
DBGPRJ,IN,i,t = [(APRJ,i ● LBPRJ,i,t ● Ri) ● (fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t + fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t + fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t)] 
(45c) 
where: 
APRJ,i = area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i;  
LBPRJ,i,t = average live tree biomass (t d.m. ha-1) in polygon, i, for year, t. LBPRJ,i,t is calculated for year, t, beginning 
with biomass estimates in year t=1 (the project start year) and with annual biomass increments (GPRJ,i,t) added as 
per calculations in equation 33 a, b. This value is then multiplied by APRJ,i, the area (ha) of forest land in polygon, i.   
Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i (see equation 33b). 
fPRJ,NATURAL,i,t = the annual proportion of biomass that dies from natural mortality in polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fNATURALi 
< 1), year, t (see equation 35), 
fPRJ,HARVEST,i,t = the proportion of biomass removed by harvesting from polygon, i, (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,HARVESTIi < 1), 
year, t (see equation 36),  
fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t = the proportion of additional biomass removed by for road and landing construction in polygon, i 
(unitless; 0 < fPRJ,DAMAGE,i,t < 1), year, t (see equation 37), 
DBGPRJ,OUT,i,t = DBGPRJ,i,t ● fPRJ,dgbDECAY,i,t 
(45d) 
where: 
DBGPRJ,i,t = the total quantity of dead belowground in polygon i, year, t (equation 17b). fPRJ,dgbDECAY,i,t = the annual 
proportional loss of dead belowground biomass due to decay, in polygon i, year, t (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,lwDECAY,i,t < 1). 
The ex ante estimation of the decay of dead belowground biomass should be done using a similar single exponent 
decay function as that described above for lying deadwood biomass. Estimates for the decay parameter 
appropriate for specific project should be derived from peer-reviewed literature (see for example: (Moore, 
Trofymow, Siltanen, Prescott, & CIDET, 2005); (Melin, Petersson, & Nordfjell, 2009). 
8.2.9 
Harvested Wood Products  
See Section 8.1.6 for various discussion and background on HWP calculations. 
The annual change in emissions associated with the production of harvested wood products (HWP), ∆CBSl,HWP,t, is 
calculated as: 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
36 
∆CPRJ,HWP,t = ∆CPRJ,STORHWP,t  – ∆CPRJ,EMITFOSSIL,t, 
(46) 
∆CPRJ,STORHWP,t = the annual change in harvested carbon that remains in storage after conversion to wood products 
(t C yr-1) 
∆CPRJ,EMITFOSSIL,t = the annual change in fossil fuel emissions from harvesting (logging and log transport) and 
processing of the various wood products.  
 
8.2.10 Carbon storage harvested wood products (∆CPRJ,STORHWP,t)  
If harvesting is occurring in the project case, see Section 8.1.7 for a discussion of key issues. 
The annual change in carbon storage in harvested wood products in year t (∆CPRJ,STORHWP,t; t C yr-1) is determined 
based upon the following equation: 
∆CPRJ,STORHWP,t = (CPRJ,STORHWP,t2 - CPRJ,STORHWP,t1) / T 
(47) 
 
where: 
CPRJ,STORHWP,t2 = carbon storage in harvested wood products at t=2; t C 
CPRJ,STORHWP,t1 = carbon storage in harvested wood products at t=1; t C 
T = number of years between monitoring t1 and t2 
t : 1,2,3…t years elapsed since the project start date 
 
Storage in the harvested wood products pool at a given time t (CPRJ,STORHWP,t; t C) is calculated according to the 
following steps for each harvest period h: 
Step 1 (Carbon contained in harvested timber): Determine the carbon contained within harvested timber 
removed from the project landbase. This can be calculated from measures of total merchantable volume 
generated during the harvest period h using species-specific wood densities and standard carbon conversions or 
estimated from live biomass removals after accounting for removal of belowground components, branches, and 
bucking losses (equation 48). In accordance with the 1605(b) approach, the harvested wood carbon (CPRJ,TIMBER,h) 
must be divided into the following product type (k) categories: 1) softwood saw log, 2) softwood pulpwood, 3) 
hardwood saw log, 4) hardwood pulpwood.  This can be done using local data if available or estimated based upon 
region and forest type according to Table 1.4 in the 1605(b) document. Table 3 provides recommendations for 
analogs for areas within North America but outside of the conterminous US; however the project proponent must 
justify the appropriateness of the selected analog. In the case of global project locations outside of North America, 
the project proponent must identify and justify the use of alternative data from peer-reviewed sources  
CPRJ,TIMBER,h = Σ[(LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,h - LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,h ● Ri + LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,h -  
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,h ● Ri) ● (1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,h) ● (1 - fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,h)] ●  
● CF 
(48) 
where: 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
37 
CPRJ,TIMBER,h= carbon contained in timber harvested in period h  (summed for all harvested polygons, i); t C  
LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,h = annual removal of live tree biomass due to commercial felling in polygon, i; t d.m. (equation 36) 
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,h = annual removal of live tree biomass from incidental sources in polygon, i; t d.m. (equation 37) 
Ri is the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i (see equation 33b). 
1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,h the proportion of live tree biomass remaining after netting out branch biomass, in polygon i 
(unitless; 0 < fBRANCH,i,t < 1)(see equation 12) 
1 - fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,h = the proportion of the log bole remaining after in-woods log processing/bucking for quality, 
length, etc., in polygon, i (unitless; 0 < fBUCKINGLOSS,i,t < 1) (equation 40) 
h = harvest period ; yr 
 
Step 2: (Carbon contained in harvested timber after milling): Determine the total carbon in harvested timber 
that will enter the wood products pool by product type accounting for mill efficiencies and estimated product 
disposition percentages (CPRJ,MILL,h; t C). The gross quantity of carbon contained in harvested timber for each of the 
four product types described in Step 1 must be decremented to account for losses during processing (equation 
49).  These losses including bark and other milling wastes and may be determined using local data or estimated 
based upon region and product type according to Table 1.5 in the 1605(b) document. Table 3 provides 
recommendations for analogs for areas within North America but outside of the conterminous US; however, the 
project proponent must justify the appropriateness of the selected analog.. The 1605(b) document also provides 
specific examples demonstrating the use of values from Tables 1.4 and 1.5 to determine net carbon storage in 
wood product types after milling (See examples 1.4 and 1.5 on pages 25-27). In the case of global project 
locations outside of North America, the project proponent must identify and justify the use of alternative data from 
peer-reviewed sources  
CPRJ,MILL,h,k =  (CPRJ,TIMBER,h,k ● fRND,k ● rRND,k) 
 
 
 
 
 
(49) 
 
where: 
CPRJ,MILL,h,k = carbon contained in harvested timber after milling in period h, for product type k; t C 
CPRJ,TIMBER,h,k = carbon contained in timber harvested in period h, for product type k; t C  
k = wood product type – (softwood saw log, softwood pulpwood, hardwood saw log, or hardwood pulpwood; 
proportions determined from Table 1.4 of 1605(b) document) 
fRND,k = fraction of growing stock volume removed as roundwood for product type k (default values by region in 
Table 1.5 of the 1605(b) document); dimensionless 
rRND,k = ratio of industrial roundwood to growing stock volume removed as roundwood for product type k (default 
values by region in Table 1.5 of the 1605(b) document); dimensionless 
 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
38 
Step 3: (Carbon storage in medium-term and long-term wood products): Calculate the total carbon lost in 
short-lived products and stored in medium-term and long-term products.  For each harvest period h, carbon stored 
in harvested wood products of a defined type (k) after accounting for milling losses (CPRJ,MILL,h,k) must be 
apportioned into one of the following categories: 
d) Short lived wood products: harvested wood products and wood waste that will decay within 3 years. 
e) Medium lived wood products: harvested wood products and wood waste that will be retired between 3 
and 100 years from the date of harvest. 
f) 
Long lived wood products: harvested wood products and wood waste that may be considered 
permanent (stored for 100 years or more). 
To determine the proportion of harvested wood products (by type) that fall into each category, refer to the “In Use” 
column for the selected forest region in Table 1.6 in the 1605(b) document. Table 3 provides recommendations for 
analogs for areas within North America but outside of the conterminous US; the project proponent must justify the 
appropriateness of the selected analog .Three values are then calculated from these data selected from Table 1.6 
in the 1605(b) document, for each product type, k : the short-lived fraction (PPRJ,SLF,k), medium-lived fraction 
(PPRJ,MLF,k), and long-lived fraction (PPRJ,LLF,k): 
PPRJ,SLF,k = 1-P3-year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(50a) 
PPRJ,LLF,k = P100-year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(50b) 
PPRJ,MLF,k = P3-year – P100-year , 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(50c) 
Each category of wood products (k) stores carbon according to the following rules: 
iv. 
Short-lived wood products – immediate emission of all carbon upon harvest 
v. 
Medium-lived wood products – no emission of carbon upon harvest, but carbon stored will decrease 
by 1/20th for the next 20 years after harvest, such that after 20 years the term becomes zero 
vi. 
Long-lived wood products – no loss of carbon. 
Thus, carbon storage in harvested wood products at time t may be calculated using a cohort approach in which 
medium-term and long-term wood products from each harvest period h are tracked independently and then 
summed over the project time period as indicated in equation 51. 
 
CPRJ,STORHWP,t, = Σ Σ (( CPRJ,MILL,h,k ● PLLF,k) + [(CPRJ,MILL,h,k● PMLF,k) ● ((20-h) / 20)]) 
(51) 
 
 
where: 
CPRJ,STORHWP,t, = carbon stored in harvested wood products in year t summed for all product types k and then over 
all harvest periods h; t C  
k = wood product type – (softwood saw log, softwood pulpwood, hardwood saw log, or hardwood pulpwood; 
proportions determined from Table 1.4 of 1605(b) document) 
h = year of harvest (the term (20-h) should not be allowed to drop below 0) 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
39 
8.2.11 mustFossil fuel emissions associated with logging, transport, and manufacture  
The annual change in fossil fuel emissions from harvesting and processing of the various wood products 
(∆CPRJ,EMITFOSSIL,t ) are calculated as: 
∆CPRJ,EMITFOSSIL,t = CPRJ,EMITHARVEST,t + CPRJ,EMITMANUFACTURE,t + CPRJ,EMITTRANSPORT,t 
(52) 
Where 
CPRJ,EMITHARVEST,t = the annual fossil fuel emissions associated with harvesting of raw material (t C yr-1) 
CPRJ,EMITMANUFACTURE,t = the annual fossil fuel emissions associated with the manufacturing of raw material (t C yr-1) 
CPRJ,EMITTRANSPORT,t = the annual fossil fuel emissions associated with the transport of raw material (t C yr-1) 
The simplest approach to calculating CPRJ,EMITFOSSIL,t is to use published or derived carbon emission intensity 
factors. In the case of harvesting, PRJ,CEMITHARVEST,t; t C yr-1), can be calculated as: 
CPRJ,EMITHARVEST,t = Σ[(LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t –  
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 - fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
CF ● cHARVEST 
(53) 
where: 
cHARVEST = carbon emission intensity factor (t C emitted/t C raw material) associated with harvesting (see Table 4 
for default values); all other terms are as defined in equation 19. 
CPRJ,EMITTRANSPORT,t must be calculated after consideration of the transport distance from harvest to processing 
facility, and the means of transportation. This term can be calculated as follows (after (Heath, et al., 2010)): 
CPRJ,EMITTRANSPORT,t = Σ[(LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t -  
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 – fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
CF ● Σ(fPRJ,TRANSPORTk ● dTRANSPORTk ● cTRANSPORTk) 
(54) 
where: 
fPRJ,TRANSPORTk = the fraction of raw material transported by transportation type, k. (unitless; 0 < fPRJ,TRANSPORTk < 1). 
dTRANSPORTk = the distance transported by transportation type, k. (km); 
cTRANSPORTk = the carbon emission intensity factor (kg C emitted/t C raw material) associated with transportation 
type, k (see Table 4 for default values); all other terms are as defined in equation 48. 
CPRJ,EMITMANUFACTURE,t = Σ[(LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t –  
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 - fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
Σ(fPRJ,PRODUCTk ● cMANUFACTUREk) ● CF 
(55) 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
40 
cMANUFACTUREk = the carbon emission intensity factor (t C emitted/t C raw material) associated with manufacture of 
product type, k; all other terms are as defined in equation 48. 
Default values for cMANUFACTUREk are provided in Table 4. Data are from a comprehensive analysis conducted in 
Finland (Pingoud, Perälä, Soimakallio, & Pussinen, 2003).  Higher comparative values from North America are 
provided for harvesting and sawnwood manufacturing to illustrate inherent variability. Project proponents may use 
the default values in Table 4, or substitute regional data, if available. 
8.3 
Leakage 
Leakage is defined as any increase in GHG emissions that occurs outside the project boundary (but within the 
same country), and is measurable and attributable to the project activities. All leakage must be assessed and 
accounted for in GHG calculations.  Positive leakage effects must be discounted.   
8.3.1 
 Activity Shifting Leakage: 
Activity shifting leakage occurs when the actual agent of harvesting moves to an area outside of the project 
boundary and initiates compensatory harvesting activities elsewhere.  Activity shifting leakage in IFM projects can 
result from current activities shifting within the project proponent’s operations due to the implementation of the 
carbon project. This effectively offsets a portion of the benefits of the carbon project emissions reductions.  The 
project proponent will demonstrate that, as per VCS requirements for IFM projects and the applicability conditions 
of this methodology, there is no leakage due to activity shifting within the project proponents’ lands upon the start 
up of the project27, using the following steps:   
STEP 1 - The project proponent must annually provide to the validator and/or verifier the locations and 
descriptions of all forestlands within the project country over which the project proponent has ownership, 
management, or legally sanctioned rights of use.   
STEP 2 - Project proponents must demonstrate annually that there is no activity shifting leakage to areas that are 
outside the project area but within the project proponents operating areas, and that the management plans and/or 
land-use designations of all other lands operated by the project proponent have not materially changed as a result 
of the project activity (e.g., harvest rates have not been increased).  Demonstration methods must include: 
1. Historical records showing trends in harvest volumes paired with records from the project time period 
showing no deviation from historical trends, or 
2. Forest management plans prepared ≥ 24 months prior to the start of the project showing harvest plans on 
all owned/managed lands paired with records from the project time period showing no deviation from 
management plans; and/or 
3. Other evidence and justification to demonstrate activity shifting related to the project is not occurring28.   
8.3.2 
 Market Leakage: 
Market leakage risk occurs when a project significantly reduces the production of a commodity causing a change 
in the supply and market demand equilibrium that results in a shift of production elsewhere to make up for the lost 
supply.  VCS provides project proponents with two options for quantifying market leakage, which are further 
defined for this methodology:   
                                              
27 See footnote 4 (and applicability criterion 7) for further requirements in the event activity shifting is found to be occurring in later years of the 
project duration.   
28 The onus is on the project proponent to demonstrate and justify that the source of data and the geographic scale and scope used to assess 
activity shifting are appropriate for the project to meet the requirements of VCS and the methodology.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
41 
1. Apply the most current VCS market leakage tool to determine a discount factor to the net change in 
carbon stock associated with the activity that reduces timber harvest (see Section 8.3.3); or, 
 
2. Develop a project-specific market leakage factor that accounts for country level leakage within similar 
forest types29.  This methodology allows two variations on this option:   
a. Utilize the CAR Forest Protocol 3.2 market leakage equation, if the project is located within 
countries where CAR applies, or can demonstrate equivalent market conditions (currently CAR 
applies only in the US but is developing protocol assumptions for Mexico and Canada) (see 
Section 8.3.4); or  
b. Utilize a detailed leakage risk assessment form provided in this methodology and provide related 
additional supporting evidence for the assessments made therein (see Section 8.3.5). 
8.3.3 
Market Leakage Option 1 – VCS Default Market Leakage Discount Factors 
In exercising this option, project proponents must utilize the most current approved VCS leakage discount method 
as outlined in the most recent VCS AFOLU requirements document30.  Projects will determine the appropriate 
discount factor in accordance with the most recent requirements for market leakage.  Project proponents must 
provide justification and evidence of how the leakage discount factor is determined.   
For project proponents using Market Leakage Option 1: 
The outcome of the VCS Leakage Discount Factor determination =  the value for MLFy (56a) 
To calculate the project market leakage (LEY, t CO2e yr-1):   
LEY = MLFy • ERy,GROSS 
(56b) 
Where,  
MLFy = Market leakage factor, as calculated above. 
ERy,GROSS = the gross difference in the overall annual carbon change between the baseline and project scenarios 
in year ‘y’ (in tonnes CO2e yr-1). This term is calculated in equation 57. 
8.3.4 
Market Leakage Option 2 – CAR Market Leakage Formula 
Based on the fact that the CAR forest protocol is widely accepted in North America, thoroughly reviewed, generally 
mutually recognized by VCS, and developed for a single country leakage condition; it is considered a valid 
approach to leakage discount factors when applied to projects located in CAR-eligible jurisdictions (currently the 
United States).  Further, project proponents may justify the application of the CAR leakage formula for log market 
conditions fundamentally similar to the United States and which are currently under development as CAR 
jurisdictions (i.e. Canada and Mexico pending).   
The CAR leakage formula is calculated as per the latest approved CAR Forest Protocol.  The currently approved 
calculation is provided Figure 1, which is to be replaced by the most up to date approved CAR method as required: 
                                              
29 Specifically:  “…market leakage shall be accounted for at the country-scale applied to the same general forest type as the project (i.e., forests 
containing the same commercial species as the forest in the project area)....” (Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2008b). 
30 Note the VCS May 24
th AFOLU Program Update, which specifies using the ratio of merchantable biomass to total biomass in the project 
versus leakage area.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
42 
Figure 1 - CAR Forestry Protocol v.3.2 Market Leakage Process3132 
 
For project proponents using Leakage Option 2:   
Utilize the CAR formulas (Equation 6.10 – shown in Figure 1), with variables calculated as follows:   
Note:  for consistency, y = n = t.   
BChv, n = Σ[(LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t -  
 
LBLBSL,Other,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 - fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
 
CF ● 44/12 
(56c.1) 
As calculated using the baseline scenario data, and where:   
LBLBSL,FELLINGS,i,t = annual removal of live tree biomass due to commercial felling in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 (equation 
6) 
                                              
31 “Secondary Effects” = Market Leakage 
32 Figure 1 is to be replaced with the latest approved CAR Forest Protocol Secondary Effects calculations at the time of PD validation.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
43 
LBLBSL,OTHER,i,t = annual removal of live tree biomass from incidental sources in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 (equation 6) 
1 - fBSL,BRANCH,i,t = the proportion of aboveground live tree biomass remaining after netting out branch biomass, in 
polygon i (unitless; 0 < fBRANCH,i,t < 1)(see equation 12) 
1 - fBSL,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t = the proportion of the log bole remaining after processing for quality, in polygon, i (unitless; 0 
< fBUCKINGLOSS,i,t < 1) (equation 12) 
Ri = the root:shoot ratio in polygon, i 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5). 
AChv, n = Σ[(LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t - LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t ● Ri + LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t -  
 
LBLPRJ,Other,i,t ● Ri) ● (1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t) ● (1 - fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t)] ●  
 
CF ● 44/12 
(56c.2) 
As calculated using the project scenario data, and where:   
LBLPRJ,FELLINGS,i,t = annual removal of live tree biomass due to restoration felling in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 (equation 
6) 
LBLPRJ,OTHER,i,t = annual removal of live tree biomass from incidental sources in polygon, i; t d.m. yr-1 (equation 6) 
1 - fPRJ,BRANCH,i,t = the proportion of aboveground live tree biomass remaining after netting out branch biomass, in 
polygon i (unitless; 0 < fBRANCH,i,t < 1)(see equation 12) 
1 - fPRJ,BUCKINGLOSS,i,t = the proportion of the log bole remaining after processing for quality, in polygon, i (unitless; 0 
< fBUCKINGLOSS,i,t < 1) (equation 12) 
CF = carbon fraction of dry matter (IPCC default value = 0.5).  
SEy = LEy 
(56c.3) 
where: 
SEy = Secondary Effects in year ‘y’ (tCO2e) calculated using equations in Figure 1 and equations 56c.1, 56c.2 and 
56c.3. 
LEY = Leakage in year y (in tonnes CO2e yr-1) – used in equation 58. 
8.3.5 
Market Leakage Option 3 – Leakage Assessment Tool 
Currently, the VCS method for assessing leakage  used in Option 1 does not provide a mechanism for weighting 
leakage into different biomass areas, and also does not provide a mechanism to separate domestic versus 
international leakage proportions. This methodology therefore provides a third option to project proponents who 
wish to undertake an assessment of market leakage conditions more detailed and specific to their project location 
and condition. 
This tool sets out a procedure to weight the VCS leakage categories according to publically available forest 
products market data for where the leakage risk is most likely to be leaked to (or replaced from).   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
44 
Following Table 5, the project proponent must conduct the risk analysis as follows: 
1. Determine the proportion of leakage expected to be replaced by international sources (i.e. proportion 
of international leakage) versus domestic sources, and; 
2. For the domestic proportion, determine the proportion of leakage to other national biomass forests, 
based on the VCS default values and categories, and the ratio of merchantable biomass to total 
biomass on the project site versus the leakage sites.   
Where a project is unable to provide any relevant published justification or supporting evidence for a risk factor 
selection in Table 5, then the project is not eligible to use this tool and must use one of the other provided options 
to assess market leakage risk.   
 
Table 5 - Market Leakage Option 3 Assessment Table 
1. 
International Leakage Proportion 
 
 
 
 
In order to determine the proportion of potential leakage which will occur within domestic markets versus 
international markets, the project proponent must calculate the proportion of the project leakage which is 
expected to be replaced from domestic (in-project country) sources versus the proportion that will likely be 
replaced from international source (and hence, be international leakage, which is given a leakage risk of 
zero in VCS).  It is assumed that the forest products market is efficient, and any leakage will be replaced 
proportionally across the project countries current national forest products market conditions.   
The following calculation provides a method to estimate the proportion of leakage which is domestic versus 
international.   
International Leakage Factor = (FPTO_DOMESTIC) * (DOM.DEMANDFROM_INTL) + (FPTO_EXPORT) * 
(EXP.DEMANDFROM_INTL) 
Where, 
FPTO_DOMESTIC = Total project country forest products delivered to domestic markets (%) 
FPTO_EXPORT = Total project country forest products delivered to export (international) markets (%) 
DOM.DEMANDFROM_INTL = Proportion of total project country Forest Products to International Markets (%) 
EXP.DEMANDFROM_INTL = Weighted sum of the proportions of key markets which are supplied from non-
project country sources (%) 
Definitions: 
“Domestic” = project country 
“International” = sum of all non-project countries which individually represent >10% of the total project 
country’s forest products production, and which collectively represent >80% of the total project country’s 
forest products export production.   
“Forest Products” = the market data utilized must be demonstrated to be representative of >80% of the 
project harvested wood products product mix.  Proponents may use forest products volume or value as long 
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
45 
as the units are consistent and comparable across markets and used consistently within this entire tool.   
“Key market(s)” = collectively must represent >80% of the project country’s domestic, import, and export 
supply, either on a log basis or lumber basis.  Individual market countries representing <10% of the total 
domestic or export market may be excluded.   
Example: 
Example of Canadian-based projects under this tool (Stats Can Data & FAO data) (only the US market 
meets the key market definition for Canadian forest products production):   
FPTO_DOMESTIC = 20% 
FPTO_EXPORT = 80% (>90% to US = single ‘Key Market’) 
DOM.DEMANDFROM_INTL = 10% (i.e. 10% of the domestic market is supplied by non-Canadian supply) 
EXP.DEMANDFROM_INTL = 65% (i.e. 65% of the US market is supplied by non-Canadian supply) 
 
LFINTL = (FPTO_DOMESTIC) * (DOM.DEMANDFROM_INTL) + (FPTO_EXPORT) * (EXP.DEMANDFROM_INTL) 
LFINTL = (0.20 * 0.10) + (0.80 * 0.65) = 54% 
Therefore, 54% of the market leakage is expected to be replaced by international sources, which is assigned 
a leakage factor of “0”.  The remaining domestic/national leakage, 46%, is then further considered in the 
biomass ratio calculations below.   
 
International Leakage Factor (LFINTL) LFINTL = (FPTO_DOMESTIC) * (DOM.DEMANDFROM_INTL) + 
(FPTO_EXPORT) * (EXP.DEMANDFROM_INTL) 
 
2.  
Proportional Leakage by Biomass Ratio: 
 
 
VCS Default Biomass Ratio Categories (see: VCS 
2008 May 24, 2010 Program Update) 
Calculated as: 
((Project Biomass Ratio – Leakage Biomass 
Ratio) / (Project Biomass Ratio)) * 100 
> 15%33 Lower 
merchantable 
biomass to total 
biomass (t/ha) 
+/- 15% 
merchantable 
biomass to total 
biomass (t/ha) 
>15% Higher 
merchantable 
biomass to total 
biomass (t/ha) 
 
Starting VCS Default Leakage Factors34: 
20% 
40% 
70% 
                                              
33 VCS does not specify a quantitative range for determining “higher”, “lower” or “similar” biomass ratios, and hence a 15% factor has been 
selected to represent a reasonable range of biomass ratios.  This factor is consistent with other approved VCS and ACR IFM methodology 
approaches. 
34 These factors are from the 2008 VCS leakage calculation method, and should be retained for use in this leakage tool Option 3 regardless of 
new VCS market leakage tool calculations.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
46 
1a. 
2a Calculating Weighted Average Leakage Biomass Ratio: 
This is a typical weighted average calculation, with the objective of creating an average difference in 
biomass ratio between the project and the national leakage areas, weighted by the proportion of timber 
supply coming from each leakage forest type: 
- 
Identify national forest type (or ecotype) data where merchantable log volume biomass and total forest 
biomass estimates are available (i.e. from published national inventory data sources, etc.) 
- 
Determine the biomass ratio in each national forest type (ratio of merchantable volume in biomass (t/ha) 
to total biomass (t/ha);  
- 
Determine the proportion of the domestic national market that is supplied by each of the national forest 
types (%); 
- 
Determine the difference between the forest type containing the project and each leakage area biomass 
ratio (Biomass Ratio Difference (%) = ((Project Biomass Ratio – Leakage Area Biomass Ratio) / Project 
Biomass Ratio) * 100);  
- 
Select the VCS default leakage factor for each national forest type, based on the difference between the 
project biomass ratio and each national forest type biomass ratio (see biomass ratio categories above); 
- 
Multiple the proportion (%) of market supplied by each leakage forest type by the VCS Default Leakage 
Factor from each forest type to determine the weighted average VCS Leakage Factor for biomass 
ratios. 
Example (simplified, using 4 national forest types): 
Project is located in national forest type 1 (biomass ratio = 0.65): 
Forest Type 1:  Biomass Ratio = 0.65; 25% of national timber inventory 
Forest Type 2:  Biomass Ratio = 0.75; 30% of national timber inventory 
Forest Type 3:  Biomass Ratio = 0.55; 25% of national timber inventory 
Forest Type 4:  Biomass Ratio = 0.75; 20% of national timber inventory 
 
Biomass Ratio difference between leakage area and project area: 
Forest Type 1 = (0.65 – 0.65)/0.65 = 0 = 40% VCS Leakage Factor 
Forest Type 2 = (0.65 – 0.75)/0.65 = -15.4% = 20% VCS Leakage Factor 
Forest Type 3 = (0.65 – 0.55)/0.65 = 15.4% = 70% VCS Leakage Factor 
Forest Type 4 = (0.65 – 0.75)/0.65 = -15.4% = 20% VCS Leakage Factor 
 
Weighted Average = (25% * 40%) + (30% * 20%) + (25% * 70%) + (20% * 20%) = 37.4% 
Example Weighted Biomass Discount Factor = 37.4% 
 
VCS Default Leakage Discount Factor, by forest 
type (selected by +-15% criteria)  
20% 
40% 
70% 
 
Proportional of Market Supplied by National 
Forest Type in each Leakage Discount Category 
(note: X + Y + Z = 100%):  
= X 
= Y 
= Z 
 
Proportional Biomass Leakage Discount Factor 
(LFBIOMASS):  
LFBIOMASS = (20% * X) + (40% * Y) + (70% * Z) 
3.  
MARKET LEAKAGE FACTOR (MLFy):  =(1 - LFINTL)35 * LFBIOMASS  
                                              
35 The inverse of the international leakage factor is the portion of the market leakage related to national leakage.  International leakage is given 
a leakage factor discount of “0” in VCS.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
47 
 
For project proponents utilizing Leakage Option 3, project market leakage (LEY; t CO2e yr-1) is calculated as:   
LEY = MLFy • ERy,GROSS 
(56d) 
Where,  
MLFy = the market leakage factor in year, y (as calculate per section 8.3.5) 
ERy,GROSS = the gross difference in the overall carbon balance between the baseline and project scenarios in year, 
y (t CO2e yr-1). See equation 57 for its calculation. 
8.4 
Summary of GHG Emission Reduction and/or Removals 
The net GHG emissions and removals are calculated for each scenario following the methods outlined in Section 
8.1 and 8.2.   
8.5 
  Summary Gross Emissions Reductions and/or Removals Equation 
Gross carbon emissions reductions (ERy,gross; t CO2e yr-1) created by the carbon project are calculated annually 
as the difference between the baseline and project scenario net emission reductions/emissions:  
ERy,GROSS = (∆CBSL,t - ∆CPRJ,t) ● 44/12   
(57) 
Where,  
∆CBSL,t = total net baseline scenario emissions calculated from equation 1 (t C yr-1).   
∆CPRJ,t = total net project scenario emissions calculated from equation 29 (t C yr-1).   
44/12 = factor to convert C to CO2e 
8.5.1 
 Summary Net Emissions Reductions and/or Removals Equation 
The annual net carbon emissions reductions is the actual net GHG removals by sinks from the project scenario 
minus the net GHG removals by sinks from the baseline scenario, were then calculated by applying the leakage 
and uncertainty discount factors (but not the VCS permanence buffer), on an annualized basis:   
ERy = ERy,GROSS - LEy 
(58) 
where:  
ERy = the net GHG emissions reductions and/or removals in year y (the overall annual carbon change between the 
baseline and project scenarios, net all discount factors except the permanence buffer) (t CO2e yr-1).   
ERy,GROSS = the difference in the overall annual carbon change between the baseline and project scenarios (t CO2e 
yr-1).   
LEy = Leakage in year y (t CO2e yr-1), as calculated in equation 56b. 
8.5.2 
 Calculating Verified Carbon Units (VCU’s) for the Project 
The number of VCU’s the project available for issuance and sale in year, y (VCUy; t CO2e yr-1), is calculated as:   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
48 
VCUy = ERy • (1 – ERy,ERR) – BRy 
(59) 
where:  
ERy = the net GHG emissions reductions and/or removals in year (t CO2e yr-1), as calculated in equation 58. 
ERy,ERR = the uncertainty factor for year, y, (calculated in Section 8.5.3), expressed as a proportion.   
BRy = estimated VCU-equivalent tCO2e issued to the VCS Buffer Pool in year, y, calculated using the latest 
version of the VCS AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool. BRy is calculated by multiplying the most current verified 
permanence risk Buffer Withholding Percentage for the project by the change in carbon stocks (difference between 
baseline and project scenario) for the project area as per the latest approved VCS AFOLU Requirements 
(Voluntary Carbon Standard, 2008a).   
8.5.3 
 Calculation of an Uncertainty Factor 
Estimated carbon emissions and removals arising from AFOLU activities have uncertainties associated with forest 
inventory, carbon stocks, biomass growth rates, modeling error, and their various expansion factors, equations and 
coefficients.  Use of conservative estimates, peer-reviewed scientific data and analysis, and high quality inventory 
sampling procedures, will mitigate uncertainty, and improve accuracy as new and reliable data are acquired over 
time.   
To be conservative, this methodology employs an over-riding project confidence deduction as a proxy for collective 
project uncertainty by assessing statistical uncertainty in the forest carbon inventory and associated modeling. The 
approach is based partly on CAR’s “Confidence Deduction” module (Climate Action Reserve, 2010). Project 
proponents are required to apply this uncertainty factor to the net emission reductions claimed by the project each 
year based on the results of the latest ex-post inventory field data collection and modeling output.  
Note that physical field plot measurement error is calculated and compared directly against a set of minimum 
accuracy threshold requirements, as described in Section 9.   
Refer to Section 8.1 for guidance on the process of stratification and how polygons and analysis units are defined.   
The methodology monitoring section specifies that all analysis units or polygons36 will have representation by one 
or more field plots.  However, due to the difficulty of determining the independence of plot data within individual 
homogeneous polygons (i.e. a specifically similar forest type, site, and age), it will be necessary to only calculate a 
single carbon density observation for each individual polygon sampled; either through the use of a single plot 
within that polygon, or calculation of the mean of multiple plots within that polygon.  Throughout these calculations 
a plot observation, subscript i, is defined to represent the mean of all plots within a given polygon.   
The project-level uncertainty factor is calculated as follows:  
Step 1 – Calculate the average percent model error (EM) for the project based on the average area-weighted 
difference between measured values in monitored plot observations and model-predicted values using Equations 
60a,b. In the case where analysis units have been used for stratification, the difference between the plot 
observation and model-predicted value (both expressed on a per hectare basis) for a given analysis unit (yd,h,i) is 
weighted by the area of its associated analysis unit (APRJ,h ) (Eq. 60a).  The use of an area-weighting factor places 
more emphasis on analysis units that represent a relatively larger proportion of the total project area. In the case 
                                              
36 If polygons are the primary stratification unit being used by the project, then each polygon shall have field plot representation.  If polygons are 
grouped into analysis units for the project, then each analysis unit shall have field plot representation (noting that not all polygons will have plot 
representation within a given analysis unit).   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
49 
where only polygons are used in the stratification, the area weighting term (see equations 60a-c) would change to 
the area of the polygon (APRJ,i), and the subscript, h, is dropped from the yd,h,i term in equations 60a-e. 
EM = 100 • (∑ yd,h,i / ∑(APRJ,h • ym,h,i)) 
(60a) 
where: 
The summation is across all plot observations, i, and across all analysis units , h; 
yd,h,i = APRJ,h • (ym,h,i - yp,h,i) 
(60b) 
EM = Mean model error for the project (%) 
yd,h,i = the area-weighted difference between measured  and predicted carbon storage in analysis unit, h, plot 
observation, i (t C) 
ym,h,i = carbon storage measured in analysis unit, h, plot observation, i (t C ha-1) 
yp,h,i = carbon storage predicted by model for analysis unit , h, plot observation, i (t C ha-1) 
APRJ,h = area of project analysis unit, h  (ha) 
Step 2 – Calculate the inventory error (EI) at a 90% confidence interval expressed as a percentage of the mean 
area-weighted inventory estimate from the measured plots.  
This methodology was designed to accommodate complex landscapes consisting of hundreds to thousands of 
polygons, which can be further grouped into analysis units.  Inventory error is estimated based upon the difference 
between modeled and measured values for monitoring plots established in polygons or in polygons grouped within 
analysis units. 
Inventory error, EI, is estimated by first calculating the standard error of the area-weighted differences between the 
plot observation measurement and the associated model-predicted carbon storage (both on a per hectare basis) 
for analysis units or polygons.  The standard error is then multiplied by the t-value for the 90% confidence interval. 
Finally EI is expressed in relative terms (in Equation 60c) by dividing the 90% confidence interval of the area-
weighted differences between predicted and measured values in all plots by the area-weighted average of the 
measured values in all monitoring plots. 
EI = 100 • [SE * 1.654 / ((1/N) • ∑(APRJ,h • ym,h,i))]  
(60c) 
Where, 
EI = Inventory error for the project (%) 
SE = the project level standard error of the area weighted differences between measured plot observation and 
predicted values of carbon storage. 
N = total number of plot observations in all analysis units or polygons37 
1.654 = the 90% confidence interval t-value 
                                              
37 For clarity, the plot observation sample size (N) is equivalent to the number of polygons sampled (for projects using either a polygon or 
analysis unit stratification method). As noted, a single plot observation is created for each polygon using the mean when there are multiple plots 
within a polygon.  Thus, in some situations the number of actual installed plots may be higher than the number of plot observations (N).   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
50 
All other terms as defined in equation 60a. 
SE = S/ √ N 
(60d) 
Where, 
N = total number of plot observations in all analysis units or polygons (see Footnote 37) 
S = the standard deviation of the area weighted differences between measured and predicted values of carbon 
storage across all analysis unit or polygons. 
S = √ [(1/ N– 1) • ∑(yd,h,i - ybard)2] 
(60e) 
Where, 
ybard = the project-level mean of the area weighted differences between measured plot observation and predicted 
values of carbon storage. See equation 60b for the calculation of yd,h,i 
All other terms as defined in equation 60b and 60c. 
Step 3 - The total error for the project (EP; %) is calculated by adding the model and inventory error terms, as 
calculated in Steps 1 and 2. 
EP = EM + EI 
(60f) 
Step 4 – Compare the result of Step 3 against Table 6 to determine the uncertainty factor: 
Table 6 - Uncertainty Factor Calculation 
Estimated Project Error, EP (%) 
Uncertainty Factor (=ERY,ERR) 
0 – 10% 
= 1.5%38 
>10% 
= 1.5% + EP – 10% 
 
The uncertainty factor is calculated at each verification and applied annually until the next verification.