4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to project activities that reduce enteric methane (CH4) emissions 
through the inhibition or reduction of methanogenesis, achieved by the introduction of a feed 
ingredient into ruminant diets. 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
1) Livestock producers must feed their animals a feed ingredient that reduces enteric CH4 
emissions by direct inhibition or suppression of methanogens in the rumen or by modifying 
the rumen environment. 
2) Only ruminant animals are included in the project. 
3) The project feed ingredient must meet the following conditions: 
a) The feed ingredient must have been demonstrated to comply with all feed and food 
regulations in each national or subnational (including local) jurisdiction in which it 
 
2 FAO (2018). Shaping the Future of Livestock. The 10th Global Forum for Food and Agriculture, Berlin, January 18–20, 
2018. Available at http://www.fao.org/3/i8384en/I8384EN.pdf. 
 
VM0041, Version 2.0 
7 
is consumed. Where conflict arises among regulations, the most stringent standard 
must apply. 
b) The feed ingredient must have no negative health impacts on the animal to which it 
is fed. This must be shown through regulatory approval and the submission of 
published evidence demonstrating no negative impacts on animal health when 
administered in accordance with its intended conditions of use. 
c) The feed ingredient must be used as per feeding instructions provided by the 
manufacturer. The instructions must define the critical conditions needed to 
secure the default level of reduction in enteric methane emissions, such as the 
feeding routine and dose of ingredient per kilogram of dry matter intake (DMI) by 
the animal. 
4) Emission reductions generated using other feed ingredients and/or activities (e.g., 
improving animal productivity or nutritional and management strategies), where the use is 
not specific to the inhibition or suppression of methanogenesis, cannot be claimed through 
this methodology. This is to prevent overestimation of emission reductions. 
5) The implementation of project activities must confirm that the herd of ruminants in a given 
operation is fed the feed ingredient. For this purpose, the project proponent must be able 
to trace the feed ingredient fed to livestock from the producer to on-farm consumption. 
6) Evidence must be provided that there will be no increase in manure emissions due to the 
feed ingredient. This may be demonstrated by one of the following: 
a) Documentation of on-farm data showing no significant differences in manure 
composition due to feed ingredient consumption, or 
b) A published study that documents feed efficiency, particularly related to energy 
and nitrogen. 
Where there are significant increases in manure emissions, the ingredient may still be 
used but the project must account for CH4 and N2O emissions from manure using IPCC Tier 
2 recommended estimation methods. 
7) Baseline emissions included in this methodology consist of CH4 production from enteric 
fermentation and are determined as the average activity over at least three continuous 
years prior to project implementation. Therefore, project activities are required to meet the 
following conditions:  
a) Where project areas involve livestock farms that were operating prior to the start 
of project activities, reliable data (e.g., feed intake in the form of energy or dry 
matter, nutrient composition of feed) for each animal group must be available for 
a minimum of two years when using baseline emissions Option 1, and three years 
when using baseline emissions Option 2. See Section 8.1 for further details on 
options for quantifying baseline emissions. 
 
VM0041, Version 2.0 
8 
b) Where project areas involve livestock farms for which no farm records nor farming 
data are available, the project proponent must be able to provide evidence to 
substantiate the animal group (i.e., animal type, production phase) to which each 
new project area is allocated, according to the average group as described in 
national or regional statistical accounts (i.e., baseline emissions will be 
considered to be the average activity in the area in which the project is located).