4 
APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
1. Projects must be located within Canada. 
2. The project start date must be after November 29, 2007. 
3. Project activities located within the province of BC must comply with the BC EOR. In the 
case of projects within other provinces, projects must comply with existing and relevant 
provincial emission offset regulations.  
4. Project activities must not include actions expected to significantly impact the hydrology 
of any site within the project area, including but not limited to flood irrigation or drainage. 
5. Where a project involves planting, the project must use genetically diverse and 
productive seed stock. For projects within the province of BC, projects must apply the BC 
Chief Forester’s Standards for Seed Use14. In the case of projects within other provinces, 
projects must comply with relevant provincial legislation and use genetically diverse and 
productive seed stock. 
6. This methodology applies to the following VCS project categories15: 
• 
Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation (ARR) 
• 
Improved Forest Management – Reduced Impact Logging (IFM – RIL) - 
• 
Improved Forest Management – Logged to Protected Forests (IFM – LtPF) 
• 
Improved Forest Management – Extended Rotation Age (IFM – ERA) 
• 
Improved Forest Management – Low to High Productivity (IFM – LtHP) 
• 
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation – Avoided Planned 
Deforestation (REDD – APD) 
7. Projects in the following project categories must also meet the following conditions: 
 
14 Available at http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/code/cfstandards/  
15 For details on VCS project categories refer to section 3.2.1 of the VCS Standard v4.0  
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
14 
• 
ARR: Project proponents must demonstrate that the project area has not been 
forest land for at least 10 years prior to project commencement. 
• 
IFM: Project area must be forest land at the time of project commencement. 
• 
REDD: Project area must be forest land at the time of project commencement, 
and must have been forest land for not less than 10 years prior to the project 
start date.