4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to tidal wetland restoration project activities (tidal wetland restoration 
as defined in Section 3 above) under the following applicability conditions: 
1) Project activities which restore tidal wetlands (including seagrass meadows, per this 
methodology’s definition of tidal wetland) are eligible. 
2) Project activities may include any of the following, or combinations of the following: 
a) Creating, restoring and/or managing hydrological conditions (e.g., removing tidal 
barriers, improving hydrological connectivity, restoring tidal flow to wetlands or 
lowering water levels on impounded wetlands) 
b) Altering sediment supply (e.g., beneficial use of dredge material or diverting river 
sediments to sediment-starved areas)  
c) Changing salinity characteristics (e.g., restoring tidal flow to tidally restricted 
areas) 
d) Improving water quality (e.g., reducing nutrient loads leading to improved water 
clarity to expand seagrass meadows, recovering tidal and other hydrologic 
flushing and exchange, or reducing nutrient residence time) 
e) (Re-)introducing native plant communities (e.g., reseeding or replanting) 
f) 
Improving management practice(s) (e.g., removing invasive species, reduced 
grazing) 
3) Prior to the project start date, the project area: 
a) Is free of any land use that could be displaced outside the project area, as 
demonstrated by at least one of the following, where relevant:  
 
VM0033, v2.1 
11 
i) The project area has been abandoned for two or more years prior to the 
project start date; or  
ii) Use of the project area for commercial purposes (i.e., trade) is not profitable 
as a result of salinity intrusion, market forces or other factors. In addition, 
timber harvesting in the baseline scenario within the project area does not 
occur; or  
iii) Degradation of additional wetlands for new agricultural sites within the 
country will not occur or is prohibited by enforced law. 
OR 
b) Is under a land use that could be displaced outside the project area), although in 
such case baseline emissions from this land use must not be accounted for, and 
where degradation of additional wetlands for new agricultural/aquacultural sites 
within the country will not occur or is prohibited by enforced law.  
OR 
c) Is under a land use that will continue at a similar level of service or production 
during the project crediting period (e.g., reed or hay harvesting, collection of 
fuelwood, subsistence harvesting). 
The project proponent must demonstrate (a), (b) or (c) above based on verifiable 
information such as laws and bylaws, management plans, annual reports, annual 
accounts, market studies, government studies or land use planning reports and 
documents. 
4) Live tree vegetation may be present in the project area and may be subject to carbon 
stock changes (e.g., due to harvesting) in both the baseline and project scenarios. 
5) The prescribed burning of herbaceous and shrub aboveground biomass (cover burns) 
as a project activity may occur. 
6) Where the project proponent intends to claim emission reductions from reduced 
frequency of peat fires, project activities must include a combination of rewetting and 
fire management. 
7) Where the project proponent intends to claim emission reductions from reduced 
frequency of peat fires, it must be demonstrated that a threat of frequent on-site fires 
exists, and the overwhelming cause of ignition of the organic soil is anthropogenic (e.g., 
drainage of the peat, arson).  
8) In strata with organic soil, afforestation, reforestation, and revegetation (ARR) activities 
must be combined with rewetting. 
 
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
12 
1) Project activities qualify as IFM or REDD. 
2) Baseline activities include commercial forestry. 
3) Project activities lower the water table, unless the project converts open water to tidal 
wetlands, or improves the hydrological connection to impounded waters. 
4) Hydrological connectivity of the project area with adjacent areas leads to a significant 
increase in GHG emissions outside the project area. 
5) Project activities include the burning of organic soil. 
6) Nitrogen fertilizer(s), such as chemical fertilizer or manure, are applied in the project 
area during the project crediting period.