7 ADDITIONALITY 
This methodology uses a project method for the demonstration of additionality. For grouped 
projects, demonstration of additionality must be based upon the initial project activity instances 
(see further details in the most recent version of the VCS Standard). Project proponents using 
this methodology must: 
1) demonstrate regulatory surplus; 
2) identify institutional barriers that would prevent the implementation of a change in pre-
existing ALM practices; and 
3) demonstrate that adoption of proposed individual or combined project activities is not 
common practice. 
Further details on each of these steps are provided below. 
Step 1: Regulatory surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements set out in the most recent version of the VCS Standard.  
Step 2: Barrier analysis 
Project proponents must apply the procedures and requirements in Step 2 of the most recent 
version of VT0008 Additionality Assessment. 
Step 3: Demonstrate that adoption of  proposed individual or combined project activities is not 
common practice 
Project proponents must determine whether the proposed project is common practice in each 
region (or ‘geographic area’ as defined for grouped projects in the VCS Standard) included 
within the project area. Common practice is defined as greater than 20% adoption.11 The 
approach to common practice demonstration outlined in this section follows a two-step 
process: 1) determine if the project activity has below 20% adoption in the project region, and 
2) where the adoption rate is greater than 20% or the required data is not available, project 
proponents must demonstrate that the activity is not common practice by applying Step 4c of 
VT0008.  
 
11 Twenty percent is the precedent for a common practice threshold established in Section 18 of the CDM 
Methodological tool: Common practice. Available at: 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-24-v1.pdf 
 
Mathur et al. (2007) and Barnes et al. (2014) confirm that approximately 20% is an appropriate threshold for 
common practice based on analysis of technology adoption and market penetration using different approaches. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 18 
 
 
The proposed project activity may be implemented as an individual practice (e.g., cessation of 
tillage) or a combined practice (e.g., conservation agriculture encompassing no-tillage, crop 
rotations and residue retention). Such combined practices are defined as those implemented 
on the same field/management unit in the same baseline crop rotation cycle or for at least 
three years where a crop rotation is not implemented (i.e., aligned with Section 6).  
Step 3.1: To determine that an individual or a combined practice is not common 
practice, the adoption rate of the respective individual practice or combined practice must be 
demonstrated to be lower than 20% where the practices are implemented. 
Evidence of practice adoption rates within the project area must be provided in the form of 
publicly available information contained in: 
a) agricultural census or other government (e.g., survey) data; 
b) peer-reviewed scientific literature; 
c) independent research data; or 
d) reports or assessments compiled by industry associations. 
To demonstrate common practice, the project area must be stratified to the state or provincial 
level (or equivalent second-order jurisdiction) in the countries where the project is being 
developed. Where supporting evidence is unavailable at the state/provincial level (e.g., in 
developing countries), aggregated data or evidence at a subnational, national, or regional level 
may be used with justification. Where stratification based on geopolitical boundaries is 
impractical (e.g., due to lack of data), other forms of stratification, such as major soil types or 
cropping zones, may be used with justification. The same stratification approach and data 
sources must be applied across the entire project to maintain the integrity of the common 
practice demonstration. The common practice assessment data source selected must be 
justified to be appropriate for the stratified project area. 
Where evidence for a proposed project activity in the region is not available from any of these 
sources, the project proponent may obtain a signed and dated attestation statement from a 
qualified independent local expert (e.g., agricultural extension agent, accredited agronomist) 
estimating the adoption rate. All projects using independent local expert attestation must 
provide the qualifications of the expert and the methods used to inform their analysis. It is 
recommended that the contracted expert has professional indemnity insurance. 
Step 3.2: Where the best available data from the above sources for an individual or 
combined practice determines that the adoption rate is greater than 20% or the required data 
is not available, project proponents must demonstrate that the activity is not common practice 
by applying Step 4c of VT0008. This step involves identifying essential distinctions between the 
proposed project activity and related activities that may be captured under Step 3.1. When 
applying Step 4c of VT0008, the information sources for Nall and Ndiff must cover the same 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 19 
 
 
geographic area (i.e., the project region), and the analysis must be on a land area basis (e.g., 
hectares). The requirement that Nall − Ndiff must be greater than 3 is not applicable. 
For example, a project intends to introduce cover crops as a project activity in the project region 
where the adoption rate per the government agricultural census is 22% covering approximately 
2 million hectares (Nall). Applying the common practice analysis per Step 4c of VT0008, the 
project identifies the following essential distinction: government subsidies for cover crop seed 
are accessed by farmers managing 1.7 million hectares (Ndiff) in the project region. The 
calculation of factor F per Step 4c of VT0008 would therefore yield 15% demonstrating that the 
proposed project activity is not considered common practice.