7 ADDITIONALITY 
Project proponents must apply a performance method (area-based approach) or a project method 
(census-based approach) to demonstrate additionality.  
7.1 
Area-based Approach 
Project proponents using the area-based approach must apply the following additionality 
demonstrations: 
• Regulatory surplus 
• Performance benchmark  
• Investment analysis10 
7.2 
Census-based Approach 
Project proponents using the census-based approach must apply the following additionality 
demonstrations:  
• Regulatory surplus  
 
9 Land use category as defined by the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Volume 4, Chapter 3 
10 The investment barrier analysis is in addition to the regulatory surplus check and the performance benchmark for the 
area-based approach. It is not required where area-based projects do not generate revenues or receive financial incentives 
from sources other than the sales of carbon credits. 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
17 
• Investment analysis11  
• Common practice 
7.3 
Additionality Demonstrations 
7.3.1 Regulatory Surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent version of the VCS 
Methodology Requirements. 
7.3.2 Performance Benchmark 
The performance benchmark must be established following the procedures outlined in Appendix 
1 and is applicable to the area-based approach only.  
Where parameters ΔSIcontrol,t and ΔSIwp,t are deemed significantly different (via Z test in Appendix 
1 Equation (A7)), the project demonstrates additionality for the performance benchmark.  
To demonstrate additionality at validation, project proponents must apply an ex-ante calculation 
to demonstrate an expected difference between modeled performance of the project and the 
forecasted performance benchmark. Additionality must be reassessed at each verification using 
the Z test in Appendix 1, Equation (A7).  
7.3.3 Investment Analysis 
Project proponents applying an investment analysis to assess additionality must use a 
benchmark analysis or investment comparison analysis and must apply the procedures and 
requirements in Step 3 of the most recent version of VCS tool VT0008 Additionality 
Assessment.12 
7.3.4 Common Practice  
The common practice analysis is applicable to the census-based approach only. The following 
steps must be taken to demonstrate that without carbon finance the project activity is not 
common practice: 
1) Define the ARR project activity (e.g., tree planting). 
2) Identify the geographic domain with a similar policy (and market, as available) 
environment as the project area. The geographic domain is first defined as the national 
boundary. Where national or subnational programs provide incentives for afforestation, 
 
11 The investment barrier analysis is always required for census-based projects. 
12 Section number from VT0008 Additionality Assessment, v1.0  
 
VM0047, v1.1 
18 
reforestation, or revegetation activities at the subnational level, the geographic domain 
must be further constrained to reflect similar incentives and market conditions as those 
presented in the project area (e.g., proximity to nurseries or wood processing 
infrastructure). 
3) Identify a similar class of adopters or landowners (e.g., smallholder farmers). 
4) Identify and explain any essential distinctions between the proposed project and similar 
activities. Such essential distinctions may include significant changes in circumstances, 
such as new barriers that have emerged or the end of promotional policies, that affect 
implementation of the proposed project activity compared to other similar activities. The 
distinction must be essential and verifiable. Essential distinctions may be related to, for 
example, changes in access to land or inputs, subsidies or other financial incentives, 
emergence of new barriers, differences in market access, infrastructure, labor 
availability, and biophysical conditions (e.g., climate, slope, or soil type). 
5) Survey a representative sample of similar landowners from within the relevant geographic 
domain within five years of the project start date. 
6) Calculate the (cumulative) adoption rate (as a percentage) of the project activity by 
landowners who have not received carbon finance revenue (e.g., are not part of a 
registered VCS AFOLU project) in the sample of the adopter class. 
Where the adoption rate is below 15% (Mathur et al. 2007), the project activity is not common 
practice. Where the adoption rate is equal to or higher than 15%, the project activity is common 
practice and is not additional.  
Alternatively, statistics on ARR activities derived from data collected within five years of the 
project start date may be used for this demonstration provided they are relevant to the project 
area, do not distinguish between activities incentivized by and not incentivized by carbon finance 
(thus are conservative), and are publicly available as: 
a) agricultural census or other government data (e.g., survey data); 
b) peer-reviewed scientific literature; or 
c) independent research or reports compiled by industry associations, with full and 
transparent methods and documentation of results.