8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Summary 
This methodology provides a flexible approach to quantifying reductions and removals from the 
adoption of improved ALM practices in the project compared to the baseline scenario. Baseline 
and project emissions are defined in terms of flux of CH4, N2O, and CO2 in tonnes of CO2e per 
unit area12 per verification period. Within each quantification unit, stock and emission changes 
in each included pool or flux are treated on a per unit area basis in accounting procedures.  
Section 8.5 provides equations using total stock or emission changes in the project to quantify 
net reductions and removals. Where a verification period spans multiple calendar years, the 
equations quantify reductions and removals by year to appropriately define vintage periods.  
The entire project area is divided into multiple quantification units that must be demonstrated 
to be more homogenous than the project area in its entirety, for the purposes of estimating 
emission reductions and removals (ERRs) (i.e., similar management activities, soil type, 
climate). In some cases, the entire project area may be considered as one quantification unit. 
Estimates of ERRs for each quantification unit within the project area are then aggregated to 
produce an estimate for the entire project area. In a staged (i.e., hierarchical, nested) design, 
additional units nested within a primary quantification unit may be implemented resulting in 
primary, secondary, tertiary, etc. quantification units (see Appendix 6 for an example). 
Quantification units must be clearly defined in the description of the sampling design provided 
in the project description document. 
The approaches for quantifying CO2, CH4, and N2O emissions are listed in Table 5. Where more 
than one quantification approach is allowable for a given gas and source, more than one 
 
12 Note that for reporting purposes, hectares should be used as the unit area when applying this methodology.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 20 
 
 
approach may be used provided that the same approach is used for a given quantification unit 
in both the project and baseline scenarios. 
Table 5: Summary of allowable quantification approaches 
GHG/
Pool 
Source 
Quantification 
Approach 1: 
Measure and 
Model* 
Quantification 
Approach 2: 
Measure and 
Remeasure 
Quantification 
Approach 3: 
Default Factors 
CO2 
SOC 
X 
X 
 
Fossil fuel  
 
 
X 
Liming 
 
 
X 
Woody biomass** 
 
 
 
CH4 
Soil methanogenesis*** 
X 
 
 
Enteric fermentation 
 
 
X 
Manure deposition 
 
 
X 
Biomass burning 
 
 
X 
N2O 
Use of nitrogen fertilizers***  
X 
 
X 
Use of nitrogen-fixing 
species*** 
X 
 
X 
Manure deposition*** 
X 
 
X 
Biomass burning 
 
 
X 
* Approach 1 may only be used where a valid model is available (see model requirements in VMD0053). 
 
** Where included in the project boundary, woody biomass is calculated using the CDM A/R tools Estimation 
of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM project activities and Simplified 
baseline and monitoring methodology for small scale CDM afforestation and reforestation project activities 
implemented on lands other than wetlands. Where woody biomass is harvested, project proponents must 
calculate the long-term average GHG benefit following guidance in the most recent versions of the VCS 
Methodology Requirements,13 and the VCS Standard.14 
 
*** Measured data on CH4 and N2O fluxes as described in VMD0053, v2.0 are required for model calibration 
and validation when following Quantification Approach 1. Periodic measurements of CH4 and N2O fluxes as 
part of project monitoring is not required. 
For each pool/source, subdivisions of the project area using different quantification 
approaches must be stratified and accounted separately. A project may switch between 
allowable quantification approaches for a given source during the project lifetime, provided that 
the same approach is used for both the project and baseline scenarios. The quantification 
approaches are as follows. 
 
Quantification Approach 1: Measure and Model 
An acceptable model is used to estimate GHG flux based on soil characteristics, implemented 
ALM practices, measured initial SOC stocks, and climatic conditions in quantification units. 
Measurements of SOC stocks are required every five years or more frequently (see Table 8). 
 
13 See Section 3.6.6 in the VCS Methodology Requirements, v4.4 
14 See Sections 3.2.28-3.2.30 of the VCS Standard, v4.7 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 21 
 
 
The remeasurement data is used to re-estimate model prediction error and recalibrate the 
model (i.e., “true-up”, see Section 8.6.1.3). 
Neither initial nor periodic measurements of CH4 and N2O fluxes are required as part of project 
monitoring. High-quality observed experimental data on soil CH4 and N2O emissions from 
controlled research trials or approved data sources as described in VMD0053 are required for 
model calibration (see Section 5.1 of VMD0053 and validation (see Section 5.2.3 of VMD0053. 
Measured datasets must be drawn from peer-reviewed and published experimental datasets 
with measurements of N2O and CH4 fluxes, ideally using control plots to test the practice 
change. Datasets may also be drawn from a benchmark database maintained by a third party 
or from measurements made within the project boundary, where approved by the independent 
modeling expert (IME),see Appendix 1 of VMD0053. 
 
Quantification Approach 2: Measure and Remeasure 
Direct measurement is used to quantify changes in SOC stocks. This approach is relevant 
where models are unavailable or have not yet been validated or parameterized, or where 
project proponents prefer to use a direct measurement approach for SOC stock change. The 
baseline scenario is measured and remeasured directly at a baseline control site linked to one 
or more quantification units. Quantification Approach 2 is only applicable to SOC.  
 
Quantification Approach 3: Default Factors 
GHG flux is calculated following the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories using equations contained in this methodology. 
Where a given activity is not practiced in the baseline or project scenarios, resulting in an 
effective input of zero for any equation element in this methodology, that equation element is 
not required. 
Baseline and project emissions are calculated for each sample field using applicable default 
values and any monitored parameters. The most accurate available emission factor applicable 
to the project conditions must be used, in the following descending order of preference:  
1) Where available, a project-specific emission factor from a peer-reviewed scientific 
publication15 must be used.  
 
15 As stated in Section 2.5.2 of the latest version of the VCS Methodology Requirements, peer-reviewed scientific 
literature used to derive (default) emission factors must be in a journal indexed in the Web of Science: Science 
Citation Index. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 22 
 
 
2) Where there is no relevant peer-reviewed scientific literature, the project proponent may 
propose alternative sources of information (e.g., government databases, industry 
publications) to establish the default factor(s) and must provide evidence that the 
alternative source of information is robust and credible (e.g., independent expert 
attestation).  
3) Where no alternative information source is available that is applicable to the project 
conditions, projects may derive emission factors using activity data collected during the 
project by following the guidance to derive Tier 2 emission factors in the respective 
sections of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories.  
4) Where projects justify a lack of sufficient activity data and project-specific information 
sources, Tier 1 and Tier 1a emission factors from the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories may be selected. 
 
Summary 
Figure 1 summarizes which equations are to be applied to each GHG flux depending on the 
selected quantification approach (see also Table 5).  
Project proponents must use the templates available on the VM0042 webpage to prepare the 
documents required for project validation and verification, including the templates for ERR 
quantification spreadsheet, model validation report and IME assessment report.   
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 23 
 
 
Figure 1: Equation map of this methodology 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 24 
 
 
Woody biomass must be quantified as per Table 5 using the CDM A/R tools Estimation of 
carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM project activities 
and Simplified baseline and monitoring methodology for small scale CDM afforestation and 
reforestation project activities implemented on lands other than wetlands, and reported using 
Equations (48) and (49). Where woody biomass is harvested, projects must calculate the long-
term average GHG benefit following guidance in the most recent versions of the VCS 
Methodology Requirements, Section 3.6 and the VCS Standard, Section 3.2. 
 
8.2 
Baseline Emissions 
Quantification Approach 1 
The baseline is modeled for each quantification unit. The model serves to project future stock 
change/emissions resulting from the schedule of ALM activities taking place in the baseline 
scenario (derived in Section 6). Further guidance on biophysical model inputs is elaborated in 
Table 6.  
Table 6: Guidance on collection of biophysical model inputs for the baseline scenario, 
where required by the model selected 
Model Input 
Category 
Timing 
Approach 
SOC content to 
calculate SOC 
stocks (initial) 
Determined prior to 
project intervention via 
direct measurements at 
t = 0 or (back-) modeled 
to t = 0 from 
measurements 
collected within ±5 
years of t = 0 
Directly measured via conventional analytical 
laboratory methods (e.g., dry combustion) or 
proximal sensing techniques (e.g., INS, LIBS, MIR, 
and Vis-NIR) with known uncertainty following the 
criteria in Appendix 4 at t = 0 or (back-) modeled to 
t = 0 following VMD0053 guidance. See parameter 
table for 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡.  
Bulk density to 
calculate SOC 
stocks (initial) 
Determined prior to 
project intervention via 
direct measurements at 
t = 0 or from 
measurements 
collected within ±5 
years of t = 0 
See Section 8.2.1.5 
Soil properties 
(other than bulk 
density and SOC) 
Determined prior to 
project intervention 
Directly measured or determined from published 
soil maps with known uncertainty. 
Estimates from direct measurements must: 
• 
Be derived from representative (unbiased) 
sampling; and 
• 
Ensure accuracy of measurements through 
adherence to best practices.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 25 
 
 
Climate variables 
(e.g., precipitation, 
temperature) 
Continuously monitored 
ex post 
Measured for each model-specific meteorological 
input variable at its required temporal frequency 
(e.g., daily) for the model prediction interval. 
Measurements are taken at the closest 
continuously monitored weather station not 
exceeding 50 km from the sample field, or from a 
synthetic weather station (e.g., PRISM16). 
 
Quantification Approach 2 
Baseline SOC stocks are measured and remeasured directly at baseline control sites which are 
linked to quantification units. Control sites are managed by applying schedules of activities 
established in the baseline scenario for the corresponding quantification unit (derived in 
Section 6). Control sites must comply with the similarity criteria listed in Table 7 and be within 
250 km of their linked quantification units. One control site may be linked to more than one 
quantification unit provided the control site meets the similarity criteria for each quantification 
unit to which it is linked.  
Control sites may be managed by project proponents, implementing partners, or by entities 
external to the project (e.g., experimental research stations outside of the project area). 
Management of control sites may change during the project but the location of baseline control 
sites themselves must remain constant over the project lifetime. Control sites must be 
sufficiently large to ensure that any changes in SOC stocks are driven by baseline management 
practices (i.e., edge effects must be eliminated) and to allow for baseline practices to continue 
unimpeded (e.g., tractors, combines, or other equipment must be able to operate as they would 
under normal conditions). Where adverse conditions such as extreme weather events or pest 
outbreaks arise during the project crediting period, managers of control sites may deviate from 
the schedule of activities to mitigate negative impacts as they would in the absence of a carbon 
project (e.g., halt irrigation if there is excess rainfall).  
Under this approach at least three control sites are required across the entire project area, but 
more will decrease uncertainty, particularly where the total number of control sites is less than 
ten. Note that with increasing variability and heterogeneity of the project area, a higher number 
of control sites is necessary to ensure that similarity criteria are met. Since stratified random 
sampling is the required sampling strategy for this methodology (see Section 8.2.1), there must 
be at least one control site per stratum, or the control site must be divided into the same strata 
as the corresponding quantification unit. Baseline SOC stocks must be reported for the 
baseline control sites and for each stratum within the project area. See Section 8.6.2 as well as 
the Soil Organic Carbon MRV Sourcebook for Agricultural Landscapes17 for further information 
on the number of samples to collect.  
 
16 Available at: https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data/prism-high-resolution-spatial-climate-data-united-states-
maxmin-temp-dewpoint 
17 Box 3.5. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35923  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 26 
 
 
 
Table 7: Similarity criteria for linking baseline control sites to quantification units under 
Quantification Approach 2 
Control Site Similarity Criterion 
Thresholda 
Topography 
Most frequent slope class18 must be the same in the 
quantification units and control sites (to be determined from a 
slope map or via a GIS slope analysis19). For control sites 
classified as hilly, steep, or very steep, the aspect must be within 
30° of the cardinal direction of the linked quantification unit. 
Soil texture to depth of project 
boundary (minimum 30 cm) 
Average soil texture must be in the same FAO20 soil textural class 
as the average soil texture of the linked quantification unit. Note 
that where significant textural differences are evident within 0–
30 cm depth, texture should be determined separately for the 
different soil horizons within that depth range.  
Soil group  
Soil group must be within the same reference soil group, 
according to the FAO World Reference Base for Soil Resources,21 
as the linked quantification unit. 
Average SOC percent by dry 
weight to depth of project 
boundary (minimum 30 cm) 
The percentage must not be significantly different from the mean 
percentage SOC of the linked quantification unit at a 90% 
confidence level. 
Historical ALM activities  
Historical ALM activities must be the same as in the linked 
quantification unit for at least five years prior to project start 
date: 
• Tillage (Y/Nd) and type of tillage practice (no tillage, 
conservation tillage, or conventional (full) tillage)  
• Crop residue removal (Y/N)  
• Crop planting and harvesting (crop typee) 
• Manure application (Y/N) 
• Compost application (Y/N) 
• Irrigation (Y/N) 
Note that not all of these activities will be universally relevant to 
all agricultural systems. Therefore, the project proponent must 
provide evidence supporting the selected historical ALM 
activities used to link control sites with quantification units. See 
Box 1 for guidance on data sources for establishing historical 
ALM activities.  
 
18 See Table 10 in Appendix 5 for soil slope classifications 
19 See Appendix 5 for workflow steps to determine the most frequent slope class using geographical information 
systems (GIS) 
20 See Annex 4 in the FAO World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2014 available at: 
https://www.fao.org/3/i3794en/I3794en.pdf The USDA Soil Texture Calculator (available ab: 
https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/survey/?cid=nrcs142p2_054167) may be used to 
determine the soil texture class based on percent sand and clay content.  
21 See Table 2 of the FAO World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2014 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 27 
 
 
Control Site Similarity Criterion 
Thresholda 
Historical land coverb 
For lands converted up to 50 years prior to the project start date, 
the site must be converted from the same major land cover type 
(e.g., forestland, grassland, savanna) as the linked quantification 
unit within ±10 years.  
Native vegetation 
The site must be within the same terrestrial ecoregion22 as the 
linked quantification unit. 
Climate zone 
The site must be within the same IPCC-defined climate zone as 
the linked quantification unit. 
Precipitationc 
The site must have mean annual precipitation within ±100 mm 
of the linked quantification unit. 
aEstimates of these quantitative thresholds must be derived from unbiased, representative sampling of the 
control site. Accuracy must be ensured through adherence to best practices (to be determined by the project 
proponent and outlined in the monitoring plan – see Section 9.3). 
bEstimated based on historical satellite or aerial imagery or, where imagery is unavailable, confirmed via local 
expert attestation 
cEstimated based on measurements taken at the closest continuously monitored weather station not 
exceeding 50 km from the control site or from a synthetic weather station (e.g., PRISM) 
dY/N: Yes/No 
eWhere crop type in the quantification unit of the project area cannot be matched in the baseline control site, a 
different crop from the same crop functional group may be selected. Crop functional group is defined in 
VMD0053 as “Broad category of crop species with similar characteristics (e.g., grasses, legumes, non-legume 
broadleaf species).” 
 
Quantification Approach 3 
The baseline is calculated for each sample field using the equations provided. Emissions 
resulting from the schedule of ALM activities taking place in the baseline scenario (derived in 
Section 6) are estimated using default emission factors and data are determined for each 
sample field at validation. 
8.2.1 Soil Organic Carbon Stocks 
Direct measurements of SOC stocks are required under Quantification Approach 1 as model 
inputs for baseline setting and at a minimum every five years after for model true-up. Direct 
measurements of SOC stocks are also required under Quantification Approach 2 to determine 
the baseline and project SOC stocks at the project start date and at each verification event. The 
initially measured SOC stocks (at t = 0 determined through direct measurements or (back-) 
modeled to t = 0 from measurements collected within ±5 years of t = 0) are the same in both 
the baseline and project scenarios at the outset of the project (i.e., SOCwp,i,0 = SOCbsl,i,0) when 
following Quantification Approach 1.  
 
22 As defined in the WWF Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World database. Available at: 
https://www.worldwildlife.org/publications/terrestrial-ecoregions-of-the-world  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 28 
 
 
Soil sampling and modeling should occur on a point or small plot (i.e., composite sample) basis 
to allow for accurate estimation of sampling error and its contribution to the uncertainty of 
credit estimates. Points should be allocated within the lowest level quantification units using an 
acceptable approach. Where small plots or composite samples are used, the distance between 
points in such a sample should be minimized to improve estimates of spatial variability. 
SOC stock estimates generated must:  
1) Be demonstrated to be unbiased and derived from representative sampling; and 
2) Ensure the accuracy of measurements and procedures through the employment of 
quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) procedures (to be determined by the project 
proponent and outlined in the monitoring plan). 
Measurement procedures for SOC and bulk density must be thoroughly described, including all 
sample handling, analysis preparation, and analysis techniques. Further details on each of 
these procedures are provided in the following sections.  
8.2.1.1 General Requirements for Soil Sampling 
Standard QA/QC procedures for soil inventory including field data collection and data 
management must be applied.  
Use or adaptation of QA/QC procedures available from published handbooks is recommended, 
such as those produced by FAO and available on the FAO Soils Portal, the ISO standards on soil 
sampling (including ISO 18400-104 Soil quality — Sampling — Part 104: Strategies), or the IPCC 
Good Practice Guidance LULUCF 2003. 
For all directly sampled parameters, the project monitoring plan must clearly spatially delineate 
the sample population and specify sampling intensities, selection of quantification units, and 
sampling stages (where applicable). The statistical analysis measurements plan must be 
submitted as part of the sampling plan for project validation. The detailed sample design must 
be specified in the monitoring plan, and unbiased estimators of population parameters 
identified for application in calculations. 
• 
For re-sampling purposes, sample locations must be georeferenced23 and seasonal 
variability considered.  
• 
Sampling and re-sampling campaigns must be conducted during the same season over 
time.  
• 
Where organic amendments are applied, projects should delay sampling or re-sampling 
to the latest time possible after the previous application and the shortest time possible 
before the next application.  
 
23 Depending on the available GPS precision, these locations may be delineated as areas of several meters in diameter.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 29 
 
 
8.2.1.2 Sampling Design: Stratified Random Sampling 
Soil sampling must be conducted following the stratified random sampling strategy.24 Each 
quantification unit within the project area should be divided into sub-units (i.e., strata) based 
on factors influencing SOC stock distribution (see below) that make each stratum more 
homogenous than the project area in its entirety.  
Each quantification unit within the project area must be divided into homogenous strata based 
on factors influencing SOC stock distribution. In a staged (i.e., hierarchical, nested) design, 
strata should be generated at the lowest level of quantification unit (see Appendix 6 for an 
example). Thus, if a sampling design establishes primary and secondary quantification units, 
strata should be generated as a subset of each secondary quantification unit. The aim of 
stratifying each quantification unit is to capture SOC stock variability more accurately. 
Depending on the size of the agricultural fields or paddocks, strata may span numerous 
fields/paddocks, or one field/paddock may be divided into several strata. 
Figure 2 shows two examples of defining quantification units and strata. Random samples 
should be taken in each stratum.  
Project-specific strata, their area, and the sampling points within strata must be reported in a 
spreadsheet and submitted as an annex to project documentation at every verification. 
The stratified random sampling strategy may be nested within a multi-stage sampling approach, 
but in such cases stratified random sampling must be employed in the stage directly before the 
sample point stage (see Appendix 6 for an example). An alternative sampling strategy may be 
proposed for a project via a methodology deviation that provides sufficient scientific rationale 
and project-specific justification.25 
Random sampling schemes, without prior stratification, frequently produce relatively high 
uncertainties when estimating SOC stock changes. Grid or linear sampling patterns require a 
large number of samples and may produce biased results due to linear features across the site 
being under- or over-represented. Therefore, grid or linear sampling patterns are not 
recommended. 
• 
To determine strata, the best available data on factors expected to affect the response 
of SOC stocks to the project activities must be used.  
• 
Projects must report the factors used in stratification and how strata were developed.  
Numerous factors determine SOC heterogeneity at field (10–100 ha) and landscape (100–
1000 ha) scales, including climate, topography, historical land use and vegetation, parent 
material, soil texture, and soil type. Stratifying the project area (or quantification units) into 
 
24 Detailed descriptions of how to conduct stratified random sampling are provided in Annex 3 in FAO (2020) and in 
Module B in World Bank (2021). 
25 See Section 3.20 of the most recent version of the VCS Standard for detailed guidance. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 30 
 
 
strata that are more homogenous than the project area in its entirety, defined by factors that 
influence SOC stocks (e.g., those listed as similarity criteria for defining baseline control sites in 
Table 7) is expected to improve sampling efficiency and reduce errors associated with project-
scale estimates of SOC stocks.  
The sampling design must capture variability within the project area. An unbiased spatially 
stratified approach is important to capture variations in SOC across the project area. The larger 
a stratum’s area and the greater the expected or known variability within a stratum, the higher 
the number of samples that must be taken within the stratum. The soil maps and databases of 
the FAO SOILS PORTAL26 (e.g., the Harmonized World Soil Database), SoilGrids,27 or locally 
available (digital) soil maps may help in choosing different strata. In addition, soil texture is 
easily estimated in the field. Since land use and management history frequently align with 
existing fields, field boundaries should be taken into account when delineating strata, though 
potential changes in field boundaries over time must be considered. Defined strata should 
remain stable over time. 
The number of homogeneous sites (i.e., the number of strata) and soil composite samples 
should be maximized. The number of years required to detect SOC stock changes decreases 
with increasing sample number. Compositing or bulking soil samples may better represent 
spatial variability, but may reduce ability to detect SOC stock changes over time. Therefore at 
least 3–5 composite samples should be taken within each stratum for model true-up or when 
using Quantification Approach 2.  
 
26 Available at: http://www.fao.org/soils-portal/data-hub/soil-maps-and-databases/en/  
27 Available at: https://soilgrids.org/  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 31 
 
 
Figure 2: Examples of defined quantification units and strata 
  
A  
 
  
B  
 
  
 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 32 
 
 
8.2.1.3 Collection and Processing of Soil Samples 
The following are guidelines for collection and processing of soil samples and reporting. 
1) Soil sampling must follow established best practices, such as those found in FAO 
(2019, 2020), De Gruijter et al. (2006), Smith et al. (2020), and Soil Science Division 
Staff (2017).  
2) Where possible, SOC content and soil mass should be obtained from the same sample, 
or alternatively from adjacent samples taken during the same sampling event. Where 
multiple cores are composited to create a single sample, these cores must be from the 
same depth and fully homogenized prior to subsampling. 
3) All organic material (e.g., living plants, crop residue) must be cleared from the soil 
surface before soil sampling.  
4) Soil mass must not include particles greater than 2 mm in diameter (i.e., gravel/stones) 
nor plant material.28 Any coarse material must be prevented from passing through a 2 
mm sieve. Drying and sieving procedures must follow laboratory-specific standard 
operating procedures (SOPs) and be consistent for all samples collected as part of the 
project, and during the entire project lifetime. 
5) Soil samples must be shipped within five days of the completion of a sampling 
campaign. Until then, samples may be temporarily stored on-site in a location protected 
from sunlight, humidity, and precipitation, avoiding mixing of the different soil 
materials. Once shipped and before analysis, samples may be stored under 
environmentally controlled conditions that minimize biological activity (e.g., as dried or 
refrigerated samples, but not frozen). The duration of refrigerated storage before 
analysis should not exceed 3 months. 
6) Sample processing procedures must be reported in detail, explicitly describing sieving 
and grinding procedures. These must remain consistent through the entire project 
lifetime even if there is a change in analytical laboratory. 
7) Reporting of SOC stock changes from direct measurements under Quantification 
Approaches 1 and 2 must occur on an equivalent soil mass (ESM) basis.  
a) The mass of soil in each depth layer depends on the bulk density of the 
respective layer. Therefore, it is important to differentiate between soil mass 
layers and soil depth layers to enable a consistent comparison of SOC changes 
and differences between two points in time and between baseline and project 
areas.  
b) SOC stocks and stock changes must be reported to a minimum depth of 30 cm 
(or down to bedrock/hardpan where soils are shallower than 30 cm). To eliminate 
 
28 Beem-Miller et al. (2016) provide a useful approach to ensuring high-quality sampling in rocky agricultural soils. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 33 
 
 
the need for extrapolation outside of the measured range, soils must be sampled 
deeper than the minimum 30 cm required for reporting SOC stock changes. 
c) To enable the ESM approach, soil samples at re-sampling must be divided into at 
least two increments. Soil mass may be derived from bulk density measurements 
using soil corers. 
d) The project proponent may select the depth increments sampled according to 
expected loosening or compaction effects throughout the project lifetime, 
because bulk density changes as a result of improved ALM will depend largely on 
land use in the project area and the ALM practices implemented as part of the 
project. 
e) Where possible, soils should be sampled to 50 cm depth (i.e., in two depth 
increments 0–30 cm and 30–50 cm), following the recommendation in Wendt 
and Hauser (2013) to ensure sub-soil depth layers are sufficient to permit 
adjustments. From these measurements, the ESM layers and the depths to 
reference mass (see columns K and L in Figure 3) are determined (see Section 
8.2.1.6). Note that only the soil mass is required from the two separate depth 
increments. SOC content analysis may be performed on only one sample after 
mixing the two depth increments.  
 
8) Soils less than 30 cm deep (e.g., due to shallow bedrock or a formed hardpan) must be 
sampled to the depth of the impeding layer. Quantification units with these 
characteristics must be documented and SOC stocks must only be reported to the 
sampled depth.29  
9) Geographic locations of intended sampling points must be established prior to 
sampling. The location of both the intended sampling point and the actual sampling 
point must be recorded. 
10) The number of samples to be taken within each stratum should be determined based 
on the expected variance, to reduce overall uncertainty. A pre-sampling of 5 to 10 soil 
samples per stratum may provide an estimate of SOC variance where up-to-date soil 
data are unavailable. 
11) A power analysis may be conducted to calculate the number of samples needed to 
enable accounting of a minimum detectable difference, following Equations (1) and (2) 
(FAO, 2019). However, projects are not required to take this number of samples. 
𝑀𝐷𝐷 ≥ 
𝑆
√𝑛 × (𝑡𝛼,𝜐 + 𝑡𝛽,𝜐)  
(1) 
 
29 This will affect the ESM layers of the respective sampling points shallower than 30 cm (see Section 8.2.1.6). 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 34 
 
 
𝑛 ≥ (𝑆 × (𝑡𝛼 + 𝑡𝛽) 
𝑀𝐷𝐷
)
2
  
(2) 
Where: 
 
MDD 
= 
Minimum detectable difference 
S 
= 
Standard deviation of the difference in SOC stocks between t0 and t1 
n 
= 
Number of samples 
tα 
= 
Two-sided critical value of the t-distribution at a given significance 
level (α) frequently taken as 0.05 (5%) 
tβ 
= 
One-sided quartile of the t-distribution corresponding to a probability 
of type II error β (e.g., 90%) 
 
Further guidance on stratification and sampling strategies over large scales is found in 
Aynekulu et al. (2011), FAO (2019), de Gruijter et al. (2016), Hengl et al. (2003), ISO (2018, p. 
18), Maillard et al. (2017), Mudge et al. (2020), and Vanguelova et al. (2016). 
8.2.1.4 Measurements of SOC Content 
SOC content with known uncertainty should be measured using dry combustion (Dumas 
method). In addition, the following proximal sensing techniques are allowed: infrared 
spectroscopy, including near infrared (NIR), visible near infrared (Vis-NIR), and mid-infrared 
spectroscopy (MIR); laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS); and inelastic neutron 
scattering (INS, also known as neutron-stimulated gamma ray analysis or spectroscopy). 
Appendix 4 provides criteria for evaluating the use of IR spectroscopy, LIBS, and INS.  
The selection of an analytical laboratory should be based on its listing as an approved 
analytical service provider of SOC measurements according to national and/or international 
standards/accreditation. Where possible, the selected analytical laboratory should be ISO/IEC 
17025 accredited. All samples throughout the entire project lifetime should be analyzed in the 
same laboratory. A change of analytical laboratory requires justification. The project proponent 
must ensure that soil analysis methods and procedures remain consistent even if there is a 
change of laboratory.  
The selected analytical laboratory should quantify and report analytical error statistics 
(determined by repeated analyses of the same sample) to project proponents on a regular 
basis. The selected laboratory should provide information on their internal quality control 
program, for example inclusion of soil reference material with known results, testing 
documentation according to quality cards (monitoring of variation in analysis, set of error 
thresholds). Further evidence of analytical quality performance evaluation should be provided 
by participation in round-robin testing (e.g., through participation in the North American 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 35 
 
 
Proficiency Testing program30) or registration as a member of the Global Soil Laboratory 
Network (GLOSOLAN31). 
Walkley-Black (wet) oxidation and loss on ignition (LOI) are not recommended due to accuracy 
concerns but may be applied where no other method is available.  
The use of remote sensing to estimate and monitor SOC stock changes is allowed through 
digital soil mapping used to initialize and/or true-up any model under Quantification Approach 1 
or used to generate mapped predictions of SOC content and/or stock at different times under 
Quantification Approach 2. The requirements and procedures of the most recent version of 
VT0014 Estimating Organic Carbon Stocks Using Digital Soil Mapping must be applied. 
8.2.1.5 Measurements of Bulk Density 
Bulk density must be determined applying the core, excavation, or clod methods in the field, 
and subsequently processing the samples in the laboratory. Best practice guidance and 
established standards for these methods, such as ISO 11272:2017 Soil quality — 
Determination of dry bulk density, must be used. Bulk density as soil mass per volume of 
sampling cores must not include particles greater than 2 mm in diameter (i.e., 
gravel/stones/rocks/coarse fraction) nor plant material. The coarse fraction may be estimated 
by sieving and weighing stones/rocks/gravel and multiplying them by the average density of the 
coarse material.32. Beem-Miller et al. (2016) provide a useful approach to ensuring high-quality 
sampling in rocky agricultural soils. Samples for bulk density, dry soil mass, and SOC content 
should be taken at the same time and from sampling locations within a few meters of the 
previous sampling point location, avoiding edge effects and disturbed areas. 
8.2.1.6 Calculation of SOC Stocks 
To ensure that changes in SOC stocks do not arise solely from a temporal change in bulk 
density (related to ALM practices), SOC stock changes based on measurements (including for 
baseline and true-up measurements under Quantification Approach 1) must be calculated on 
an ESM basis33 following the procedures explained in Ellert and Bettany (1995), Wendt and 
Hauser (2013), or von Haden et al. (2020). The SOC mass of each depth layer or increment per 
unit area is calculated as the product of soil mass and organic carbon concentration, where soil 
mass is obtained by dividing the dry sample mass in each depth layer by the area sampled by 
the probe or auger (Wendt & Hauser, 2013):  
 
 
30  See https://www.naptprogram.org/  
31 See https://www.fao.org/global-soil-partnership/glosolan/en/  
32 FAO (2019) provides details on a method to estimate the coarse mineral fraction volume. Although this is a precise 
method, it is not required under this methodology as it is very time-consuming. 
33 Calibration and statistical validation datasets used for modeling under Quantification Approach 1 do not need to meet 
the ESM requirement. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 36 
 
 
𝑀𝑛,𝑑𝑙,𝑆𝑂𝐶= ( 𝑀𝑛,𝑑𝑙,𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
𝜋 (𝐷
2)
2
×  𝑁
 × 10 000) × 𝑂𝐶𝑛,𝑑𝑙 
(3) 
Where: 
Mn,dl,SOC 
= 
SOC mass in soil sample n in depth layer dl (kg/ha) 
Mn,dl,sample 
= 
Soil mass of sample n in depth layer dl (g)  
D  
= 
Inside diameter of probe or auger (mm)  
N  
= 
Number of cores sampled (unitless) 
OCn,dl 
= 
Organic carbon content in sample n in depth layer dl (g/kg) 
10 000 
= 
Conversion factor from g/mm2 to kg/ha 
 
The cumulative SOC mass per unit area is then calculated by summing all sampled depth 
increments (see column H in Figure 3). Project proponents may use the spreadsheet34 provided 
in Wendt and Hauser (2013) to calculate reference ESMs and adjustments independently from 
sampled depth increments by using a cubic spline function (see Figure 3). Alternatively, the R 
script35 provided in von Haden et al. (2020) may be applied. Where one of these templates is 
used, a copy showing the calculation procedures must be submitted as part of the 
documentation to be validated by the validation/verification body (VVB). 
In the example in Figure 3, the cumulative organic carbon (OC) mass to 30 cm depth at the first 
sampling point VM42point1-1 is 47.36 Mg/ha (t/ha; cell H15) for a cumulative soil mass of 
1950 Mg/ha (cell F15). Column I provides standard cumulative reference masses, which in this 
example have been adjusted to cover the maximum measured soil mass (sample with highest 
density). The respective ESM layers are set as 0–1950 Mg/ha and 1950–3253 Mg/ha (column 
L). The values in column M represent the OC mass in each ESM layer, calculated with a cubic 
spline function. To comply with reporting SOC stocks to at least 30 cm depth on an ESM basis, 
projects must use the cumulative reference soil mass for 0–1950 Mg/ha. In this example, the 
three sample points would have SOC mass of 47.36 Mg/ha (cell J15), 49.9 Mg/ha (cell J20), 
and 36.8 Mg/ha (cell J25). These match the values in column M. These values must then be 
used to calculate an average SOC mass valid for the total area of the quantification unit. When 
re-sampling and comparing SOC stocks at two different points in time, the same principle must 
be applied to ensure that results are reported for an ESM that covers the measured sample 
with the highest density (i.e., highest determined soil mass).   
 
Figure 3: Screenshot of ESM spreadsheet provided in Wendt and Hauser (2013) 
 
34 Available for download in the VM0042 webpage at: https://verra.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/ESM-sample-
spreadsheets-Wendt-and-Hauser-2013.xlsx   
35 Available at: 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/action/downloadSupplement?doi=10.1111%2Fgcb.15124&file=gcb15124-sup-
0002-Supinfo.pdf  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 37 
 
 
 
 
Note that under Quantification Approach 1, SOC stocks for model initialization may be 
calculated using Equation (4) where models use SOC stocks as an input rather than ingesting 
SOC content and bulk density values separately. Where models require bulk density inputs, 
such bulk density measurements must be taken following the approach described in Section 
8.2.1.5.  
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙= 100 × 𝐵𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 ×  𝑑 × 𝑂𝐶𝑛,𝑑𝑙  
(4) 
 
Where: 
SOCmodel 
= 
SOC stock as model input data (t/ha) 
BDcorr   
= 
Corrected bulk density of the fine soil fraction, after subtracting the mass 
proportion of the coarse fragments (g/cm3) 
d 
= 
Soil depth (cm) 
100 
= 
Conversion factor from g/cm2 to t/ha 
 
Finally, modeled SOC stocks under Quantification Approach 1 must be calculated using 
Equation (5) and following the guidance in VMD0053: 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ʄ(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) 
(5) 
Where: 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 38 
 
 
SOCbsl,i,t 
= 
Estimated carbon stocks in the SOC pool in the baseline scenario for 
quantification unit i at the end of year t (t CO2e/ha)  
ʄ(SOCbsl,i,t) 
= 
Modeled SOC stocks in the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year 
t, calculated by modeling SOC stock changes over the course of the 
preceding year (t CO2e/ha) 
i 
= 
Quantification unit 
8.2.2 Change in Carbon Stocks in Aboveground and Belowground Woody Biomass 
Where carbon stocks in aboveground and belowground woody biomass are included in the 
project boundary per Table 3, the change in carbon stocks in trees (ΔCTREE,bsl,i,t) and shrubs 
(ΔCSHRUB,bsl,i,t) in the baseline for quantification unit i in year t are calculated using the CDM A/R 
tools Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM 
project activities and Simplified baseline and monitoring methodology for small scale CDM 
afforestation and reforestation project activities implemented on lands other than wetlands.  
Where woody biomass is included in the project boundary, the relevant Afforestation, 
Reforestation, and Revegetation (ARR) requirements in the most recent version of the VCS 
Methodology Requirements apply.36 Where woody biomass is harvested, projects must 
calculate the long-term average GHG benefit following guidance in the most recent versions of 
the VCS Methodology Requirements Section 3.6 and the VCS Standard Section 3.2.  
8.2.3 Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Fossil Fuel Combustion 
Where carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel are included in the project boundary per Table 
3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3, using 
Equations (6) and (7). 
Parameter 𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ is estimated using the following equation: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (∑𝐸𝐹𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑗,𝑖,𝑡
𝐽
𝑗=1
)/𝐴𝑖 
(6) 
Where: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= 
Areal mean carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
EFFbsl,j,i,t 
= 
Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the baseline 
scenario in vehicle/equipment type j for quantification unit i in year t 
(t CO2e) 
Ai 
= 
Area of quantification unit i (ha) 
 
36 VCS Methodology VM0047 Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation is the recommended methodology for 
projects cultivating woody biomass as a primary project activity. The woody biomass quantification approach will be 
updated in a future revision of VM0042 drawing from approaches used in VM0047. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 39 
 
 
j 
= 
Type of fossil fuel (gasoline, diesel or other)  
The parameter EFFbsl,j,i,t is estimated using the following equation:  
𝐸𝐹𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑗,𝑖,𝑡= 𝐹𝐹𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑗,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑗 
(7) 
Where: 
FFCbsl,j,i,t 
= 
Consumption of fossil fuel type j for quantification unit i in year t (liters) 
EFCO2,j 
= 
Emission factor for combustion of fossil fuel type j (t CO2e/liter) 
8.2.4 Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Liming 
Application of calcitic limestone (CaCO3) or dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) releases bicarbonate 
(2HCO3−), which evolves into CO2 and water (H2O) as carbonate limes dissolve. Where one of 
the ALM practices is liming and resulting carbon dioxide emissions are not deemed de minimis, 
they are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3 using Equations 
(8) and (9). 
Parameter 𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ is estimated using the following equation: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝐸𝐿𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 /𝐴𝑖 
(8) 
Where: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean carbon dioxide emissions from liming in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
ELbsl,i,t 
= Carbon dioxide emissions from liming in the baseline scenario for 
quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e) 
 
𝐸𝐿𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ((𝑀𝐿𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑒,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖 × 𝐸𝐹𝐿𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑒) + (𝑀𝐷𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑒,,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖 × 𝐸𝐹𝐷𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑒)) × 44
12   
(9) 
 
Where: 
MLimestone,bsl,i 
= Amount of calcitic limestone (CaCO3) applied to quantification unit i 
in year t (tonnes) 
EFLimestone 
= Emission factor for calcitic limestone (0.12) (t C/t of limestone) 
MDolomite,bsl,i 
= Amount of dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) applied to quantification unit i in 
year t (tonnes) 
EFDolomite 
= Emission factor for dolomite (0.13) (t C/t of dolomite) 
44/12 
= Molar mass ratio of CO2 to C applied to convert CO2-C emissions to 
CO2 emissions 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 40 
 
 
8.2.5 Methane Emissions from the SOC Pool 
Where methane emissions from soil methanogenesis are included in the project boundary per 
Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 1 using 
Equation (10). 
 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝐺𝑊𝑃CH4 × ʄ(𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡)  
(10) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from SOC pool in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
ʄ(CH4_soilbsl,i,t) 
= Modeled methane emissions from soil in the baseline scenario for 
quantification unit i in year t, calculated by modeling soil methane 
fluxes over the course of the preceding year (t CO2e/ha) 
GWPCH4 
= Global warming potential for CH4 (t CO2e/t CH4) 
8.2.6 Methane Emissions from Livestock Enteric Fermentation 
Where methane emissions from livestock enteric fermentation are included per Table 3, they 
are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3 using Equation (11). 
Following the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories, quantification must be differentiated by livestock type, manure management 
system, and productivity system.  
𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 × ∑
𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃× 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑛𝑡,𝑙,𝑃
𝐿
𝑙=1
1000
)/𝐴𝑖 
(11) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from livestock enteric fermentation 
in the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t 
(t CO2e/ha) 
Popbsl,l,i,t,P 
= Population of grazing livestock of type l in quantification unit i for 
productivity system P in year t in the baseline scenario (head 
numbers) 
EFent,l,P 
= Enteric fermentation emission factor for livestock type l in 
productivity system P (kg CH4/(head × year)) 
l 
= Type of livestock 
P 
= Productivity system 
1000 
= Conversion factor from kg to t 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 41 
 
 
8.2.7 Methane Emissions from Manure Deposition 
Where methane emissions from manure deposition are included in the project boundary per 
Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3 using 
Equations (12) and (13). 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 × ∑
(𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃× 𝑉𝑆𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃× 𝐴𝑊𝑀𝑆𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃,𝑆× 𝐸𝐹𝐶𝐻4,𝑚𝑑,𝑙,𝑃,𝑆)
𝐿
𝑙=1
106 × 𝐴𝑖
 
(12) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Baseline areal mean CH4 emissions from manure deposition in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
VSl,i,t,P 
= Average volatile solids excretion per head for livestock type l in 
quantification unit i for productivity system P in year t (kg volatile 
solids/(head × day) 
AWMSl,i,t,P,S 
= Fraction of total annual volatile solids for each livestock type l in 
quantification unit i, that is managed in manure management system 
S in the project area, for productivity system P (dimensionless) 
EFCH4,md,l,P,S 
= Emission factor for methane emissions from manure deposition for 
livestock type l for productivity system P in manure management 
system S (g CH4/kg volatile solids) 
S 
= Manure management system 
106 
= Conversion factor from grams to tonnes 
 
𝑉𝑆𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃= (𝑉𝑆𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒,𝑙,𝑃× 𝑊𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃
1000
) ×  365 
(13) 
Where: 
VSrate,l,P 
= Default volatile solids excretion rate for livestock type l for 
productivity system P (kg volatile solids/(1000 kg animal mass × 
day)) 
Wbsl,l,i,t,P 
= Average weight in the baseline scenario of livestock type l for 
quantification unit i in productivity system P in year t (kg animal 
mass/head) 
1000 
= Conversion factor kg per tonne 
365 
= Days per year 
 
8.2.8 Methane Emissions from Biomass Burning 
Where methane emissions from biomass burning are included in the project boundary per 
Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3 using 
Equation (14). 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 42 
 
 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 × ∑
𝑀𝐵𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑐,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐶𝐹𝑐× 𝐸𝐹𝑐,𝐶𝐻4
𝐶
𝑐=1
106
)/𝐴𝑖 
(14) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Methane emissions in the baseline scenario from biomass burning 
for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
MBbsl,c,i,t 
= Mass of agricultural residues of type c burned in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (kg) 
CFc 
= Combustion factor for agricultural residue type c (proportion of pre-
fire fuel biomass consumed) 
EFc,CH4 
= Methane emission factor for the burning of agricultural residue type 
c (g CH4/kg dry matter burned) 
c 
= Type of agricultural residue 
106 
= Conversion factor from grams to tonnes 
 
8.2.9 Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Nitrogen Fertilizers and Nitrogen-Fixing Species 
Nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrification/denitrification include direct and indirect emissions 
from nitrogen fertilizers and direct emissions from nitrogen-fixing species. Where nitrous oxide 
emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils from nitrogen fertilizers and nitrogen-fixing species are 
included in the project boundary per Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario under 
Quantification Approaches 1 or 3. Under Quantification Approach 1, Equation (15) is used. 
Under Quantification Approach 3, Equations (16)–(25) are used. Following the 2019 
Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, 
quantification must be differentiated by livestock type, manure management system, and 
productivity system.  
Quantification Approach 1 
Direct and indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils (nitrogen fertilizers, 
manure deposition, and nitrogen-fixing species) in the baseline scenario are quantified as: 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂× ʄ(𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) 
(15) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean direct and indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to 
nitrogen inputs to soils in the baseline scenario for quantification unit 
i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
ʄ(N2O_soilbsl,i,t) 
= Modeled nitrous oxide emissions from soil in the baseline scenario 
for quantification unit i in year t, calculated by modeling soil fluxes of 
nitrogen forms over the course of the preceding year (t N2O/ha) 
GWPN2O 
= Global warming potential for N2O (t CO2e/t N2O) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 43 
 
 
Quantification Approach 3 
Nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils in the baseline scenario are estimated 
by applying Equation (16). 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= 𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖.𝑡+ 𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑁2𝑂_𝑁𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
(16) 
Where: 
N2O_soilbsl,i,t 
= Nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_fertbsl,i,t 
= Nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in the baseline scenario 
for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_mdbsl,i,t 
= Nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_Nfixbsl,i,t 
= Nitrous oxide emissions from crop residues due to the use of N-fixing 
species in the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t 
(t CO2e/ha) 
Where nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use are included in the project boundary per 
Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario using Equations (17)–(23).  
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= 𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡 
(17) 
Where: 
N2O_fertbsl,direct,i,t 
= Direct nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_fertbsl,indirect,i,t 
= Indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Direct nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in the baseline scenario are quantified in 
Equations (18)–(20).  
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = ((𝐹𝑆𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝐹𝑂𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐸𝐹𝑁𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡× 44/28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂)/𝐴𝑖 
(18) 
𝐹𝑆𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝑀𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑆𝐹,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝐶𝑆𝐹
𝑆𝐹
 
(19) 
𝐹𝑂𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝑀𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑂𝐹,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐹
𝑂𝐹
   
(20) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = Areal mean direct nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 44 
 
 
FSNbsl,i,t 
= Synthetic N fertilizer applied to quantification unit i in year t in the 
baseline scenario (t N) 
FONbsl,i,t 
= Organic N fertilizer applied to quantification unit i in year t in the 
baseline scenario (t N) 
EFNdirect 
= Emission factor for nitrous oxide emissions from N additions from 
synthetic fertilizers, organic amendments, and crop residues (t N2O-
N/t N applied) 
Mbsl,SF,i,t 
= Mass of N-containing synthetic fertilizer type SF applied to 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t fertilizer) 
NCSF 
= N content of synthetic fertilizer type SF (t N/t fertilizer) 
Mbsl,OF,i,t 
= Mass of N-containing organic fertilizer type OF applied to 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t fertilizer) 
NCOF 
= N content of organic fertilizer type OF (t N/t fertilizer) 
SF 
= Synthetic N fertilizer type 
OF 
= Organic N fertilizer type 
44/28 
= Molar mass ratio of N2O to N applied to convert N2O-N emissions to 
N2O emissions  
Indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in the baseline scenario are quantified in 
Equations (21)–(23).  
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ,𝑖,𝑡)/𝐴𝑖 
(21) 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑡= [(𝐹𝑆𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝐺𝐴𝑆𝐹,𝑙,𝑆) +
(𝐹𝑂𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝐺𝐴𝑆𝑀,𝑙,𝑆) ] × 𝐸𝐹𝑁𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡× 44/28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂 
(22) 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ,𝑖,𝑡= (𝐹𝑆𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡+
𝐹𝑂𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝐿𝐸𝐴𝐶𝐻,𝑙,𝑆× 𝐸𝐹𝑁𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ× 44
28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂 
(23) 
 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = Areal mean indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to fertilizer use in 
the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_fertbsl,volat,i,t 
= Indirect nitrous oxide emissions produced from atmospheric 
deposition of N volatilized due to fertilizer use in the baseline 
scenario in quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e) 
N2O_fertbsl,leach,i,t 
= Indirect nitrous oxide emissions produced from leaching and runoff 
of N, in regions where leaching and runoff occurs, due to fertilizer 
use in the baseline scenario in quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e)  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 45 
 
 
FracGASF 
= Fraction of all synthetic N added to soils that volatilizes as NH3 and 
NOx (dimensionless) 
FracGASM 
= Fraction of all organic N added to soils and N in manure and urine 
deposited on soils that volatilizes as NH3 and NOx (dimensionless) 
EFNvolat 
= Emission factor for nitrous oxide emissions from atmospheric 
deposition of N on soils and water surfaces (t N2O-N/(t NH3-N + NOx-
N volatilized)) 
FracLEACH 
= Fraction of N (synthetic or organic) added to soils and in manure and 
urine deposited on soils that is lost through leaching and runoff, in 
regions where leaching and runoff occurs (dimensionless)  
EFNleach 
= Emission factor for nitrous oxide emissions from leaching and runoff 
(t N2O-N/t N leached and runoff) 
 
Where nitrous oxide emissions due to the use of N-fixing species are included in the project 
boundary per Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario using Equations (24) and 
(25). 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑁𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (𝐹𝐶𝑅,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐸𝐹𝑁𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡× 44
28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂)/𝐴𝑖 
(24) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑁𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions from crop residues due to the 
use of N-fixing species in the baseline scenario for quantification 
unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
FCR,bsl,i,t 
= Amount of N in N-fixing species (above- and belowground) 
returned to soils in the baseline scenario for quantification unit i 
in year t (t N) 
 
𝐹𝐶𝑅,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝑀𝐵𝑔,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡,𝑔
𝐺
𝑔=1
 
(25) 
Where: 
MBg,bsl,i,t 
= Annual dry matter (above- and belowground) of N-fixing species g 
returned to soils for quantification unit i in year t (t d.m.) 
Ncontent,g 
= Fraction of N in dry matter for N-fixing species g (t N/t d.m.) 
g 
= Type of N-fixing species 
 
8.2.10 Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Manure Deposition 
Where nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition are included in the project boundary 
per Table 3, they are quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3 using 
Equations (26)–(31). 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 46 
 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡 
(26) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition in 
the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_mdbsl,direct,i,t 
= Direct nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha)  
N2O_mdbsl,indirect,i,t 
= Indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Direct nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition in the baseline scenario are quantified 
using Equations (27) and (28). 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃,𝑆
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ =
∑
𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑟𝑒,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃× 𝐸𝐹𝑁2𝑂,𝑚𝑑,𝑙,𝑆× 44/28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂
𝐿
𝑙=1
1000 ×  𝐴𝑖
 
(27) 
𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑟𝑒,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃= (𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝑒𝑥𝑙,𝑃) × 𝐴𝑊𝑀𝑆𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃,𝑆× 𝑀𝑆𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡  
(28) 
 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃,𝑆
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 
Areal mean direct nitrous oxide emissions due to manure 
deposition in the baseline scenario for quantification unit i for 
productivity system P and manure management system S in year 
t (t CO2e/ha) 
Fbsl,manure,l,i,t,P 
= 
Amount of nitrogen in manure and urine deposited on soils by 
livestock type l for productivity system P in quantification unit i in 
year t (t N) 
Nexl,P 
= 
Average annual nitrogen excretion per head of livestock type l for 
productivity system P (kg N deposited/(head × year)) 
EFN2O,md,l,S 
= 
Emission factor for nitrous oxide from manure and urine 
deposited on soils by livestock type l for manure management 
system S (kg N2O-N/kg N input) 
MSbsl,l,i,t 
= 
Baseline fraction of total annual N excretion for each livestock 
type l for quantification unit i in year t that is deposited on the 
project area (%) 
1000 
= 
Conversion factor from kg to t 
Indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to manure deposition in the baseline scenario are 
quantified under Quantification Approach 3 using Equations (29)–(31). 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ,𝑖,𝑡)/𝐴𝑖 
(29) 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 47 
 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑡= 𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑟𝑒,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃× 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝐺𝐴𝑆𝑀,𝑙,𝑆× 𝐸𝐹𝑁𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡× 44
28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂 
(30) 
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ,𝑖,𝑡= 𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑟𝑒,𝑙,𝑖,𝑡,𝑃× 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝐿𝐸𝐴𝐶𝐻,𝑙,𝑆× 𝐸𝐹𝑁𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ× 44
28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂 
(31) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = Areal mean indirect nitrous oxide emissions due to manure 
deposition in the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t 
(t CO2e/ha) 
N2O_mdbsl,volat,i,t 
= Indirect nitrous oxide emissions produced from atmospheric 
deposition of N volatilized due to manure deposition for 
quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e) 
N2O_mdbsl,leach,i,t 
= Indirect nitrous oxide emissions produced from leaching and runoff 
of N, in regions where leaching and runoff occurs, as a result of 
manure deposition for quantification unit i in year t. Equal to zero 
where annual precipitation is less than potential 
evapotranspiration, unless irrigation is employed (t CO2e) 
8.2.11 Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Biomass Burning 
Nitrous oxide emissions from biomass burning in the baseline scenario are quantified under 
Quantification Approach 3. 
Parameter 𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ is estimated using Equation (32).  
 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = (𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂× ∑
𝑀𝐵𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑐,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐶𝐹𝑐× 𝐸𝐹𝑐,𝑁2𝑂
𝐶
𝑐=1
106
)/𝐴𝑖 
(32) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= 
Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions in the baseline scenario from 
biomass burning for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
EFc,N2O 
= 
Nitrous oxide emission factor for the burning of agricultural residue 
type c (g N2O/kg dry matter burnt) 
106 
= 
Conversion factor from grams to tonnes 
 
8.3 
Project Emissions 
Stock change/emissions resulting from project scenario ALM activities are calculated or 
modeled based on monitored inputs. Project scenario CO2, CH4, and N2O emissions must be 
quantified following the approaches found in Table 5 and using the equations provided in 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 48 
 
 
Section 8.2. For all equations, the subscript bsl must be substituted by wp to make it clear that 
the relevant values are being quantified for the project scenario. Further, as per Section 8.4.2, 
where livestock are included in the baseline, the project must use at a minimum the average 
livestock value from the historical look-back period. 
Quantification Approach 1 
Model inputs must be collected following the guidance in Table 8. 
Table 8: Guidance on collection of model inputs, where required by the model 
selected, for Quantification Approach 1 for the project scenario  
Model Input Category 
Timing 
Approach 
SOC content to 
calculate SOC stocks 
Determined at project start 
via direct measurements at 
t = 0 or (back-) modeled to 
t = 0 from measurements 
collected within ±5 years of 
t = 0. Subsequent 
measurements are required 
every five years or more 
frequently. 
Directly measured via conventional 
analytical laboratory methods — for example 
dry combustion or proximal sensing 
techniques (INS, LIBS, MIR, and Vis-NIR) — 
with known uncertainty, following the 
criteria in Appendix 4 and VMD0053 
guidance. See parameter table for 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡. 
Bulk density to 
calculate SOC 
stocks (initial) 
Determined prior to 
project intervention via 
direct measurements at 
t = 0 or from 
measurements 
collected within ±5 
years of t = 0 
See Section 8.2.1.5 
Soil properties  
(other than bulk 
density and SOC) 
Determined ex ante 
Measured or determined from published soil 
maps with known uncertainty. 
Estimates from direct measurements must: 
1) Be derived from representative 
(unbiased) sampling; and 
2) Ensure accuracy of measurements 
through adherence to best practices (to 
be determined by the project proponent 
and outlined in the monitoring plan). 
Climate variables 
(e.g., precipitation, 
temperature) 
Continuously monitored ex 
post 
Measured for each model-specific 
meteorological input variable at its required 
temporal frequency (e.g., daily) for the model 
prediction interval. Measurements are taken 
at the closest continuously monitored 
weather station not exceeding 50 km from 
the sample field, or from a synthetic weather 
station (e.g., PRISM37). 
 
37 Available at: https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data/prism-high-resolution-spatial-climate-data-united-states-
maxmin-temp-dewpoint  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 49 
 
 
ALM activities (as 
identified following 
procedures in 
VMD0053, 
referencing 
categories of 
practices outlined in 
Applicability 
Condition 1) 
Monitored ex post 
Required model inputs related to ALM 
practices must be monitored and recorded 
for each project year t. Information on ALM 
practices is monitored via consultation with, 
and substantiated with a signed attestation 
from, the farmer or landowner of the 
quantification unit. Any quantitative 
information (e.g., discrete or continuous 
numeric variables) on ALM practices must be 
supported by one or more forms of 
documented evidence pertaining to the 
selected sample field and relevant 
verification period (e.g., management logs, 
receipts or invoices, farm equipment 
specifications). 
Units for quantitative information will be 
based on model input requirements. 
Quantification Approach 2 
Quantification Approach 2 is used to estimate emissions from SOC stocks only. SOC stocks in 
the project scenario (SOCwp,i,t) are calculated on an equivalent soil mass (ESM) basis by 
multiplication with the SOC content in each quantification unit or stratum at time t − 1, directly 
measured in each sample field. Where bulk density is measured in a fixed depth approach, 
mass corrections may be applied to meet the ESM requirement.  
A detailed description of SOC stock calculations with multiple soil depth increments, and 
spreadsheets and R scripts to standardize and facilitate calculations on an ESM basis, are 
provided in Wendt and Hauser (2013) and von Haden et al. (2020). SOC stock changes are 
calculated in Equations (3) to (5).  
Quantification Approach 3 
Project emissions are calculated for each sample field using applicable default values and any 
monitored parameters. The most accurate available emission factor applicable to the project 
conditions must be used, in the following descending order of preference: 
1) Where available, a project-specific emission factor from a peer-reviewed scientific 
publication38 must be used.  
2) Where there is no relevant peer-reviewed scientific literature, the project proponent may 
propose alternative sources of information (e.g., government databases, industry 
publications) to establish the default factor(s) and must provide evidence that the 
alternative source of information is robust and credible (e.g., independent expert 
attestation).  
 
38 As stated in Section 2.5 of the most recent version of the VCS Methodology Requirements, peer-reviewed scientific 
literature used to derive (default) emission factors must be published in a journal indexed in the Web of Science: 
Science Citation Index. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 50 
 
 
3) Where no alternative information source is available that is applicable to the project 
conditions, project proponents may derive emission factors using activity data collected 
during the project by following the guidance to derive Tier 2 emission factors in the 
respective sections of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories.  
4) Where project proponents justify a lack of sufficient activity data and project-specific 
information sources, Tier 1 and Tier 1a emission factors from the 2019 Refinement to 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories may be selected. 
Woody Biomass 
Aboveground woody biomass must be included where project activities may significantly reduce 
this pool compared to the baseline. In all other cases, aboveground woody biomass is an 
optional pool. Where included, it is calculated using the CDM A/R tools Estimation of carbon 
stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM project activities and 
Simplified baseline and monitoring methodology for small scale CDM afforestation and 
reforestation project activities implemented on lands other than wetlands. Where woody 
biomass is harvested, projects must calculate the long-term average GHG benefit following the 
guidance in the most recent versions of the VCS Methodology Requirements Section 3.6 and 
the VCS Standard Section 3.2. 
8.4 
Leakage 
Improved ALM projects may result in leakage through: new application of organic amendments 
from outside the project area (i.e., organic amendments applied in the project from outside of 
the project area, that were not previously applied in the historical look-back period); productivity 
declines; displacement of livestock outside of the project boundary; and/or diversion of 
biomass residues that were used for bioenergy applications in the baseline scenario. Guidance 
on how to account for each type of leakage is provided below. 
As mentioned in Section 5, where the sum of increases in GHG emissions from any leakage 
source is less than 5% of the total net anthropogenic reductions and removals due to the 
project, such sources may be deemed de minimis and may be ignored. This must be 
demonstrated via application of the CDM Tool for testing significance of GHG emissions in A/R 
CDM project activities. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 51 
 
 
8.4.1 Accounting for Leakage from New Application of Organic Amendments from 
Outside the Project Area 
Where new39 or additional40 manure, compost, or biosolids41 are applied in the project that 
were not applied in the historical look-back period, there is a risk of activity-shifting leakage if 
the organic amendments were applied to other fields before the project and their application is 
diverted to the fields participating in the project. To account for this type of leakage, a 
deduction must be used unless any of the following apply: 
1) The manure or compost applied as a project activity in the project are newly produced 
on-site from farms within the project area;  
2) The manure is documented to have been diverted from an uncontrolled anaerobic 
lagoon, pond, tank, or pit42 from which there is no recovery of methane for generation 
of heat and/or electricity; or 
3) The manure, compost, or biosolids are documented to not have been used as a soil 
amendment. 
The deduction represents the portion of manure, compost, or biosolids carbon that remains in 
the project area without degrading and which would have otherwise been applied to agricultural 
land outside of the project area. 
Equation (33) estimates the leakage from imported manure, compost, or biosolids that are 
diverted from other applications and could have led to an increase in SOC outside the project 
boundary in the absence of the project activity. The total amount of carbon applied is reduced 
to 12% based on the global manure C retention coefficient from Maillard and Angers (2014). 
This value reflects the fraction of manure carbon expected to remain in project area soils. While 
derived for manure, the equation is also conservatively applied to compost or biosolids in this 
methodology.  
𝐿𝐸𝑂𝐴,𝑡= ∑(𝑀_𝑂𝐴𝑤𝑝,𝑙,𝑡× 𝐶𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑜𝑎,𝑡× 0.12 × 44
12)
𝑙
 
(33) 
Where: 
LEOA,t 
= Leakage from organic amendments in year t (t CO2e) 
 
39 In this context, “new” refers to organic amendment application to fields that did not have organic amendment applied 
during the historical look-back period. 
40 In this context, “additional” refers to organic amendment application to fields that had organic amendment applied 
during the historical look-back period, where the amount of organic amendment increases in the project scenario. 
41 Biosolids are the nutrient-rich organic materials resulting from the treatment of domestic sewage in a wastewater 
treatment facility (i.e., treated sewage sludge).  
42 Where manure is diverted for field application, rather than stored anaerobically in an uncontrolled lagoon, pond, tank, 
or pit, the avoided methane emissions will far outweigh the SOC impacts. Where manure is temporarily stored prior to 
field application, the storage should occur under aerobic conditions in stocks or piles. For definitions of manure 
storage and management systems, refer to Table 10.18 of Chapter 10 of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 52 
 
 
M_OAwp,I,t 
= Mass of organic amendment applied as fertilizer in the project area 
in year t, disaggregated by livestock type l for manure (tonnes) 
CCwp,oa,t 
= Carbon content of organic amendment applied as fertilizer in the 
project area in year t, disaggregated by livestock type l for manure 
(t C/t organic amendment) 
0.12 
= Fraction of manure (i.e., organic amendment) carbon expected to 
remain in project area soils (unitless) 
44/12 
= Ratio of molecular weight of carbon dioxide to carbon 
8.4.2 Accounting for Leakage from Livestock Displacement 
CH4 and N2O emissions from livestock production are dependent on livestock population (see 
Sections 8.2.6, 8.2.7, and 8.2.10). To avoid crediting reductions resulting from livestock 
displacement (i.e., lowering of CH4 and N2O emissions within the project area relative to the 
baseline by reducing the number of livestock within the project boundary), when a livestock 
population decline occurs in the project scenario, project proponents must either:  
a) use the livestock population in the baseline scenario to calculate with-project emissions 
and quantify leakage from livestock displacement using VMD0054 Module for 
Estimating Leakage from ARR Activities as per equation (36), OR;  
b) demonstrate that the project scenario commodity production (e.g., meat, dairy, fiber) 
did not decrease and that livestock was not displaced but slaughtered. In this case, the 
project proponent must quantify emissions with project scenario livestock populations 
and assume that no leakage from livestock displacement occurs (i.e., in equation (36), 
LKdisp,t = 0).   
Where livestock production declines in the project scenario relative to the baseline scenario, 
projects must account for this foregone production as described in Section 8.4.3. 
8.4.3 Accounting for Leakage from Production Declines 
Project proponents must account for leakage from production declines in the initial years of a 
project43 or due to changes in overall crop or livestock products produced. To do so, project 
proponents must apply the most recent version of VMD0054 as modified by the following: 
1) Throughout VMD0054, read “ALM” and “Agricultural Land Management” in place of 
“ARR” and “Afforestation, Reforestation, and Revegetation”; and read “VM0042 Improved 
Agricultural Management” in place of “VM0047 Afforestation, Reforestation, and 
Revegetation.”  
 
43 Initial implementation of improved ALM practices may lead to some declines in productivity as the producer adjusts 
their operation. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 53 
 
 
2) Replace Equation (5) in VMD0054, v1.044 with the following equation to incorporate the 
land sparing effect of adding new agricultural commodities. Read “production change” in 
place of “foregone production” when defining parameter 𝑙 and throughout VMD0054, 
revising its definition to remove “minimum value is zero.”  
𝑙𝑗,𝑡= 𝐹𝑃𝑗,𝑡−𝐿𝑀𝑗,𝑡 
(34) 
3) Replace Equation (7) in VMD0054, v1.0 with the following equation to limit the area 
generating leakage to only that which results in net land conversion (where AL is greater 
than zero). This prevents calculating positive leakage in the event of net land sparing 
from changes in agricultural commodity production. 
𝐴𝐿𝑡= 𝑀𝐴𝑋 (∑𝐼𝑁𝐿𝑗,𝑡
𝑇
𝑗=1
 , 0) 
(35) 
4) Use the outcome of Equation (10) from VMD0054, v1.0 to quantify annual leakage from 
displaced production as follows: 
𝐿𝐾𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝,𝑡= 𝑀𝐴𝑋(0,𝐿𝐾𝑡−𝐿𝐾𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟)
𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠
 
(36) 
Where: 
LKdisp,t 
= Leakage emissions from livestock displacement in year t (t CO2e) 
LKt 
= Cumulative leakage up to year t calculated using VMD0054 (t CO2e) 
LKprior 
= Cumulative leakage between y = 0 and the previous verification 
event, calculated using VMD0054 (t CO2e) 
years 
= Duration of the verification period (years) 
8.4.4 Accounting for Leakage from Diversion of Biomass Residues Used for Energy 
Applications in the Baseline Scenario 
Where manure or crop residue management is a component of the project activity, and the 
manure or crop residues are diverted from energy applications (e.g., fuel for cookstoves or 
biomass power generation) in the baseline scenario there is a risk of leakage. Implementation 
of the project activity may force these competing energy applications to use inputs which are 
not carbon neutral. Leakage emissions LEBR,Div,t must be determined following procedures in 
the CDM’s TOOL16: Project and leakage emissions from biomass,45 Section 6,2 Leakage due to 
diversion of biomass residues from other applications in year y.46 
 
44 Or equivalent equation in a newer version of VMD0054 
45 See Section “Leakage due to diversion of biomass residues from other applications” in the latest version of CDM 
TOOL16.   
46 For consistency with other parameters in Equation (38), the subscript t pertaining to “year” is used instead of y as in 
the CDM tool. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 54 
 
 
8.5 
Net Reductions and Removals 
GHG emission reductions occur when: 
1) Carbon stocks decrease from year t to year t + 1 in the baseline scenario and, to a 
lesser extent, in the project scenario.47 The cumulative carbon stock change in the 
project scenario is negative or zero (i.e., the project carbon stock at the end of the 
verification period is less than or equal to the carbon stock at the project start date). 
2) Carbon stocks decrease from year t to year t + 1 in the baseline scenario and, carbon 
stocks increase in the project scenario. Note that this variation may also generate 
carbon removals as described in paragraph (2) in introduction of equation 40, below.  
3) CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion and liming are lower in the project than in 
the baseline scenario. 
4) CH4 emissions from the SOC pool (i.e., through soil methanogenesis), livestock enteric 
fermentation, manure deposition, and biomass burning are lower in the project than in 
the baseline scenario. 
5) N2O emissions from nitrogen fertilizers and nitrogen-fixing species, manure deposition, 
and biomass burning are lower in the project than in the baseline scenario. 
GHG emission reductions before allocation of leakage emissions are quantified as: 
𝐸𝑅𝑡=  𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝)
× (Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑡+ Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑡+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑡+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑡
+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑡+ (∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡 × (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙)) 
+ (∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡 × (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙)) + ∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑡
+ MIN(0, ∆𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −MIN(0, ∆𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)) 
+ (1 −𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝)) × 
(Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑡+ Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑡+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑡+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑡+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑡
+ (∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡 × (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙)) 
+ (∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡 × (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙)) + ∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑡
+ MIN(0,∆𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −MIN(0,∆𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)
+ MAX(0, ∆𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −MAX(0,∆𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)) 
 
(37) 
 
47 In this case, the project activity would decelerate the decrease in carbon stocks over time, avoiding emissions in the 
considered timeframe. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 55 
 
 
Where:  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 1 if  ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡> 0
𝑡
1
 and;  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 0 if ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡≤0
𝑡
1
 
I(ΔCO2wp) 
= Switches on the first part of Equation (37) when the cumulative 
carbon stock change in the project scenario is positive, and the 
second part when the carbon stock change is negative 
ERt 
= Estimated reductions in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCO2_fft 
= Total GHG emission reductions from fossil fuel combustion in year t 
(t CO2e) 
ΔCO2_limet 
= Total carbon dioxide emission reductions from liming in year t 
(t CO2e) 
ΔCH4_entt 
= Total methane emission reductions from livestock enteric 
fermentation in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCH4_mdt 
= Total methane emission reductions from manure deposition in year 
t (t CO2e) 
ΔCH4_bbt 
= Total methane emission reductions from avoided or reduced 
biomass burning in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCH4_soilt 
= Total methane emission reductions from increasing uptake into the 
SOC pool in year t (t CO2e) 
UNCt,CH4_soil 
= Uncertainty deduction in year t when using Quantification Approach 
1 to model methane emission reductions from increasing uptake 
into the SOC pool (fraction between 0 and 1) 
ΔN20_soilt 
= Total nitrous oxide emission reductions from 
nitrification/denitrification in year t (t CO2e) 
UNCt,N2O_soil 
= Uncertainty deduction in year t when using Quantification Approach 
1 to model nitrous oxide emission reductions from 
nitrification/denitrification (fraction between 0 and 1) 
ΔN2O_bbt 
= Total nitrous oxide emission reductions from avoided or reduced 
biomass burning in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCO2wp,t 
= Total carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCO2bsl,t 
= Total carbon stock change in the baseline scenario in year t (t CO2e) 
 
Net GHG emission reductions are quantified as: 
𝐸𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡= 𝐸𝑅𝑡−𝐿𝐾𝐸𝑅,𝑡 
(38) 
Where: 
ERNET,t 
= Estimated net GHG emission reductions in year t (t CO2e) 
LKER,t 
= Leakage allocated to GHG emission reductions in year t (t CO2e) 
 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 56 
 
 
Leakage allocated to emission reductions (LKER,t) is calculated as:  
𝐿𝐾𝐸𝑅,𝑡=  (𝐿𝐸𝑂𝐴,𝑡+ 𝐿𝐸𝐵𝑅,𝑡) × 
𝐸𝑅𝑡
𝐸𝑅𝑡+ 𝐶𝑅𝑡
 
(39) 
 
Where: 
LEBR,t 
= Leakage emissions from the diversion of manure or crop residues 
from baseline energy applications in year t (t CO2e) 
CRt 
= Estimated carbon dioxide removals in year t (t CO2e) 
 
Carbon dioxide removals occur when the cumulative carbon stock change in the project 
scenario is positive (i.e., the project carbon stock is higher than at the project start date). Then, 
possible annual stock variation includes:  
1) Carbon stocks increase from year t to year t + 1 in the baseline scenario and, to a 
greater extent, in the project scenario.48 
2) Carbon stocks decrease from year t to year t + 1 in the baseline scenario and carbon 
stocks increase from year t to year t + 1 in the project scenario.49   
Carbon dioxide removals are quantified as: 
𝐶𝑅𝑡= 𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) × (MAX(0, ∆𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −MAX(0,∆𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)) 
(40) 
Where: 
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 1 if  ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡> 0
𝑡
1
 and;  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 0 if ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡≤0
𝑡
1
 
I(ΔCO2wp) 
= Switches Equation (40) on when the cumulative carbon stock 
change in the project scenario is positive, and off when the change 
is negative 
 
Net carbon dioxide removals are quantified as: 
𝐶𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡= 𝐶𝑅𝑡−𝐿𝐾𝐶𝑅,𝑡 
(41) 
Where: 
 
48 In this case, CO2 removals would occur in the baseline scenario and the project activity enhances removals in the 
considered timeframe. 
49 In this case, the project activity leads to avoiding emissions that would occur in the baseline scenario in the 
considered timeframe, and increases carbon stocks beyond the level at the project start date, resulting in CO2 
removals. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 57 
 
 
CRNET,t 
= Estimated net carbon dioxide removals in year t (t CO2e) 
LKCR,t 
= Leakage allocated to carbon dioxide removals in year t (t CO2e) 
 
Leakage allocated to carbon dioxide removals (LKCR,t) is calculated as:  
𝐿𝐾𝐶𝑅,𝑡=  (𝐿𝐸𝑂𝐴,𝑡+ 𝐿𝐸𝐵𝑅,𝑡) × 
𝐶𝑅𝑡
𝐸𝑅𝑡+ 𝐶𝑅𝑡
 
(42) 
 
Net reductions and removals are quantified as: 
𝐸𝑅𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡= 𝐸𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡+ 𝐶𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡 
(43) 
Where: 
ERRNET,t 
= Estimated net reductions and removals in year t (t CO2e) 
 
In the following subsections, reductions are calculated by subtracting project (subscript wp) 
from baseline (subscript bsl) emissions, as the emissions are expected to be lower in the 
project than in the baseline scenario. On the contrary, removals are calculated by subtracting 
baseline C stocks from project C stocks, as C stocks are expected to be higher in the project 
than in the baseline scenario. 
8.5.1 Carbon Stock Changes 
Total carbon stock change in the baseline scenario in year t is quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡= ∆𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡× (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝐶𝑂2 × 𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡)) + ∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡
+ ∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡 
(44) 
 
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙_𝑡) = +1 if   Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑡− Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡≥0 and;  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙_𝑡) = −1 if  Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑡− Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡< 0 
Where: 
ΔCO2_soilbsl,t 
= SOC stock change in the baseline scenario in year t (t CO2e) 
UNCt,CO2 
= Uncertainty deduction in year t associated with modeling or 
measuring SOC stock changes (fraction between 0 and 1) 
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡) 
= Changes the sign of the Uncertainty 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝐶𝑂2 from positive to 
negative when the SOC stock change between project and 
baseline scenario is negative (see note below) ensuring a 
conservative application of uncertainty when SOC losses result in 
emissions instead of removals.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 58 
 
 
ΔCTREE,bsl,t 
= Carbon stock change in tree biomass in the baseline scenario in 
year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCSHRUB,bsl,t 
= Carbon stock change in shrub biomass in the baseline scenario in 
year t (t CO2e) 
Note – When the SOC stocks in the project scenario decrease more rapidly or increase less 
rapidly than in the baseline scenario, the application of the I(ΔCO2_soilt) function ensures that 
the uncertainty deduction multiplier is a value >1 adding up the SOC losses. In the more usual 
case where SOC stock increases in the project scenario are higher than in the baseline 
scenario, the uncertainty deduction multiplier remains a value between 0 and 1 resulting in a 
deduction.  
Total carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t is quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡= ∆𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑡× (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑡,𝐶𝑂2 × 𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡)) + ∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑤𝑝,𝑡
+ ∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑤𝑝,𝑡 
(45) 
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡) = 1 if   Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑡− Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡≥0 and;  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡) = −1 if  Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑡− Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡< 0 
Where: 
ΔCO2_soilwp,t 
= SOC stock change in the project scenario in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCTREE,wp,t 
= Carbon stock change in tree biomass in the project scenario in 
year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCSHRUB,wp,t 
= Carbon stock change in shrub biomass in the project scenario in 
year t (t CO2e) 
Quantification unit SOC stock change in the baseline scenario in year t is quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡= ∑((𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 1
𝑥 ) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(46) 
 
Where: 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean carbon stocks in the SOC pool in the baseline scenario 
for quantification unit i at the end of year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean carbon stocks in the SOC pool in the baseline scenario 
for quantification unit i at the end of year t − x (t CO2e/ha) 
x 
= Length of the verification period (years) 
Ai 
= Area of quantification unit i (ha) 
Quantification unit SOC stock change in the project scenario in year t is quantified as: 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 59 
 
 
∆𝐶𝑂2_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑡= ∑( (𝑆𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 1
𝑥 ) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(47) 
Where: 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean carbon stocks in the SOC pool in the project scenario 
for quantification unit i at the end of year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean carbon stocks in the SOC pool in the project scenario 
for quantification unit i at the end of year t − x (t CO2e/ha) 
Note - SOC stock changes must be converted to t CO2e using the factor 44/12 (ratio of 
molecular weight of carbon dioxide to carbon).  
For Quantification Approach 2, SOC stock changes for quantification unit i in year t are 
compared to the estimated SOC stock change in baseline control sites. The mean SOC stock 
per hectare of each “project site–baseline control site” combination should be used. Where 
measurements are conducted less frequently than every year, results must be divided by the 
number of years to calculate an annual SOC stock change. 
Tree biomass carbon stock change in the baseline scenario in year t is quantified as:  
∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡= ∑(∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥) × 1
𝑥 × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(48) 
Where:  
∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean baseline carbon stock change in tree biomass for 
quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥 
= Areal mean baseline carbon stock change in tree biomass for 
quantification unit i in year t − x (t CO2e/ha) 
 
Tree biomass carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t is quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑤𝑝,𝑡= ∑(∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥) × 1
𝑥× 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(49) 
Where:  
∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean project scenario carbon stock change in tree biomass 
for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
∆𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥 
= Areal mean project scenario carbon stock change in tree biomass 
for quantification unit i in year t − x (t CO2e/ha) 
 
Shrub biomass carbon stock change in the baseline scenario is quantified as: 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 60 
 
 
∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡= ∑(∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥) × 1
𝑥× 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(50) 
Where:  
∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean baseline carbon stock change in shrub biomass for 
quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥 
= Areal mean baseline carbon stock change in shrub biomass for 
quantification unit i in year t − x (t CO2e/ha) 
 
Shrub biomass carbon stock change in the project scenario is quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑤𝑝,𝑡= ∑(∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥) × 1
𝑥× 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(51) 
Where:  
∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean project scenario carbon stock change in shrub 
biomass for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
∆𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡−𝑥 
= Areal mean project scenario carbon stock change in shrub 
biomass for quantification unit i in year t − x (t CO2e/ha) 
 
8.5.2 Fossil Fuel Combustion Emission Reductions (ΔCO2_fft) 
GHG emission reductions from fossil fuel combustion are quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑡= ∑
(𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
  
(52) 
Where: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean GHG emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean GHG emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the 
project scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
 
8.5.3 Liming Emission Reductions (ΔCO2_limet) 
GHG emission reductions from liming are quantified as: 
Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑡= ∑(𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡−𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(53) 
Where: 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 61 
 
 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean GHG emissions from liming in the baseline scenario 
for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean GHG emissions from liming in the project scenario for 
quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
8.5.4 Methane Emission Reductions (ΔCH4t) 
Methane emission reductions from the SOC pool are quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡= ∑
(𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ − 𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
  
(54) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from SOC pool in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from SOC pool in the project scenario 
for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Methane emission reductions from livestock enteric fermentation are quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑡= ∑(𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(55) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from livestock enteric fermentation in 
the baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from livestock enteric fermentation in 
the project scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Methane emission reductions from manure deposition are quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑡= ∑(𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(56) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from manure deposition in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑚𝑑𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from manure deposition in the project 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Methane emission reductions from avoided or reduced biomass burning are quantified as: 
∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑡= ∑(𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(57) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 62 
 
 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from biomass burning in the baseline 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from biomass burning in the project 
scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
8.5.5 Nitrous Oxide Emission Reductions (ΔN2Ot) 
Nitrous oxide emission reductions from nitrification/denitrification are quantified as: 
∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡= ∑(𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
  
(58) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions from nitrogen inputs to soils in the 
baseline scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions from nitrogen inputs to soils in the 
project scenario for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Nitrous oxide emission reductions from biomass burning are quantified as: 
∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑡= ∑(𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ −𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(59) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Nitrous oxide emissions from biomass burning in the baseline scenario 
for quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Nitrous oxide emissions from biomass burning in the project scenario for 
quantification unit i in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
8.6 
Uncertainty 
Uncertainty deductions are estimated separately for each GHG source within a project. 
Deductions are based on an estimate of the total error of the project’s calculated reductions 
and removals for that source over a given verification period. Key sources of uncertainty that 
contribute to this error differ for each quantification approach. This section details these 
sources of error and methods to estimate such errors for use in an uncertainty assessment and 
calculation of the required uncertainty deduction.  
Uncertainty guidance provided here assumes that all soil sampling/analysis and modeling 
occurs on a point basis. In other words, the model is run in a manner to represent a single point 
in space at which initial soil data and management data have been collected, and uncertainty 
is calculated by combining estimates of sampling, modeling, and measurement error based on 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 63 
 
 
the design chosen to select the points. Alternative approaches (e.g., modeling on an areal 
basis) are considered a deviation and project proponents must demonstrate that such 
approaches will not negatively impact the conservativeness of reduction and removal estimates 
per the most recent version of the VCS Standard.50  
Across quantification approaches, a key source of error is sampling error, which emerges from 
only being able to measure/model a portion of the total project area. Appropriate estimates of 
this source of error are specific to the sample design employed. Per Section 8.2.1, this 
methodology requires that stratified random sampling is used. Strata should be based on 
physical and management factors that minimize within-strata variability. Individual sample 
points are allocated randomly within those strata on a proportional basis by area. 
The remainder of this section is based on a simplified example of a stratified random sampling 
design in which the entire project is divided into strata and points within those strata are 
placed using simple random sampling with replacement. Examples of additional uncertainty 
calculations using a multi-stage design potentially applicable in grouped project scenarios are 
available in Appendix 6. Equations here and in Appendix 6 are provided as examples for 
possible sample designs expected to be used in projects developed under this methodology. 
Where a project proponent elects to use an alternative design via a methodology deviation, they 
must provide a similar demonstration of uncertainty calculations that consider the same 
sources of error identified here and that are appropriate to the chosen design.  
8.6.1 Quantification Approach 1 
Quantification Approach 1 is a measure and model approach in which a biogeochemical model 
is used to simulate changes in SOC stocks and GHG fluxes over a given time period in both the 
project and baseline scenarios. Initial measures of SOC are taken at the project start51 for use 
within the model. SOC is periodically remeasured throughout the project period to true-up 
modeled estimates of SOC stock changes. Key sources of error accounted for under 
Quantification Approach 1 include: 
• 
Model prediction error resulting from uncertainty in model parameters or model 
structural errors (i.e., inaccurate representation of actual biogeochemical processes). 
Model prediction error is calculated using independent statistical validation datasets 
per the processes outlined in VMD0053. Alternatively, project proponents may account 
for model prediction error by calibrating models to include parameter uncertainty (e.g., 
a Bayesian implementation of the model) and using the Monte Carlo (MC) simulation or 
error propagation approach detailed below.  
 
50 Section 3.20 in the VCS Standard, v4.7. 
51 Initial measurements of SOC may be conducted at t = 0 or (back-) modeled to t = 0 from measurements collected 
within ±5 years of t = 0. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 64 
 
 
• 
Sampling error resulting from measuring/modeling only a portion of the project area. 
Estimates of sampling error are contingent on the sampling design employed by the 
project proponent.  
• 
Measurement error of model inputs (see Table 6), including initial SOC content, bulk 
density, soil texture, and management data, where applicable. In many cases, the 
impact of these measurement errors on the error of estimated reductions and removals 
is assumed to be captured in model prediction error and/or sampling error (see Section 
8.6.1.2.2 for additional details). Where alternative approaches for measuring SOC 
content, such as soil spectroscopy techniques, are used, procedures for estimating 
measurement error of these techniques as outlined in Appendix 6 must be followed. In 
this case, MC simulation is required unless it is demonstrated that such errors have a 
de minimis effect on model estimates of reductions and removals.  
For each carbon pool or GHG flux, these sources of error are estimated separately and then 
combined to estimate a single uncertainty deduction for that carbon pool or GHG flux across 
the entire project. Two approaches are eligible to estimate the uncertainty:  
1) Analytical calculation of error propagation; or 
2) Monte Carlo (MC) simulation. 
8.6.1.1 Analytical Calculation of Error Propagation 
In this approach, the various sources of error outlined above are independently estimated for 
each GHG source or carbon pool • that results in a reduction or removal (e.g., SOC, N2O). The 
estimated errors are then combined to provide an estimate of the total variance of the areal 
mean emission reductions and removals across the project for each source in each verification 
period (𝑠Δ•
̅̅̅̅,𝑡
2
). This is used to determine an appropriate uncertainty deduction.  
8.6.1.1.1 
Model Prediction Error 
Model prediction error includes model structural error (i.e., parameter uncertainty) and any 
errors related to model data inputs (e.g., inaccuracy of source for soil texture data), which result 
in incorrect estimation of a flux or change in stock in either the project or baseline scenarios or 
both. Model prediction error is quantified by using a statistical validation dataset that includes 
ground-truth measurements of stock changes or fluxes for the baseline and project scenario 
practices. Differences between these ground-truth measurements and model simulations of the 
same locations/practices are calculated, and assuming the model is unbiased, model 
prediction error is captured by the variance of these errors.  
The ideal statistical validation dataset would come from controlled experimental field trials in 
which practices that simulate a project scenario are used in one part of the field and practices 
that simulate a baseline scenario are used in another part of the same field. Then, errors of the 
project minus baseline emissions of a certain gas or pool, Δ•, are computed directly at each 
site i using 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟∆·,𝑖= ∆•
̂ 𝑖− ∆•𝑖. The model uncertainty is estimated as the variance of 
error∆•, across all sites in the statistical validation dataset. Statistical validation data come 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 65 
 
 
from experiments that range in duration from a few years to many decades, and model 
prediction error at each point is derived from simulations that match the durations of those 
experiments. This means that these errors necessarily represent the accumulated model error 
over varying time intervals. When estimating model prediction error for verification, model error 
from a single verification period – which may range from one to five years – is required and is 
likely to be smaller than the raw mean squared statistical validation error.  
For verification periods shorter than the median length of experiments in the statistical 
validation dataset, a single mixed-duration estimate of model prediction error is conservative 
and acceptable to use at verification. For example, where a model is validated against a 
dataset containing experiments with lengths of 2, 2, 3, 5, 9, and 48 years, the error from this 
statistical validation dataset may be applied to any simulation of length four years (the median 
length of experiments in the dataset) or shorter. 
Where insufficient data are available to use the approach described above, quantification of 
model error may be split into two separate tasks:  
1) Model predictions and ground truth measurements may be used to estimate typical 
errors of the prediction of reductions and removals in one scenario (e.g., just the 
project scenario), and  
2) The correlation of errors between project and baseline scenarios may be estimated 
from a more limited number of side-by-side field trials such as those described above.  
Assuming that the variance of the model prediction is the same in the project and baseline 
scenarios (i.e., 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•,𝑤𝑝
2
 = 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•,𝑏𝑠𝑙
2
 which is denoted by 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•
2
), then: 
 
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,Δ•
2
= 𝑠2 (∆•
̂ 𝑏𝑠𝑙− ∆•
̂  𝑝𝑟) = 2[𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•
2
−𝑐𝑜𝑣(∆•
̂  𝑤𝑝,∆•
̂  𝑏𝑠𝑙)] 
(60) 
Where:  
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,Δ•
2
 
= Variance of modeled estimates of emission reductions in gas or pool • 
(t CO2e/ha)2 
∆•
̂ 𝑏𝑠𝑙 
= Modeled estimate of change in emission reductions in gas or pool • in 
the baseline scenario (t CO2e) 
∆•
̂ 𝑤𝑝 
= Modeled estimate of change in emission reductions in gas or pool • in 
the project scenario (t CO2e) 
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•
2
 
= Estimated variance of errors made by model prediction of emissions in 
gas or pool • (estimated from measurements in fields that need not be 
side-by-side trials with baseline and project scenarios) (t CO2e/ha)2 
By writing 𝑐𝑜𝑣(∆•
̂  𝑤𝑝,∆•
̂  𝑏𝑠𝑙) in terms of a correlation coefficient: 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 66 
 
 
𝜌= 
𝑐𝑜𝑣(∆•
̂  𝑤𝑝, ∆•
̂  𝑏𝑠𝑙) 
√(𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,• 𝑤𝑝
2
)(𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,• 𝑏𝑠𝑙
2
)
 
(61) 
Then: 
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,Δ•
2
=  2 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•
2
 (1 −𝜌) 
Where:  
ρ 
= Correlation of errors in project and baseline scenario pairs (estimated 
from side-by-side field trials of baseline and project scenarios) 
Note – see parameter tables in Section 9.2 for derivation of ∆̅•,𝑡 and •̅𝑡 
Because side-by-side trials are rare, ρ is estimated from fewer data points than 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,•
2
. In the 
initial stages of a project, it is expected that the datasets used to estimate model prediction 
error will be from peer-reviewed publications or readily available benchmark datasets that meet 
the requirements outlined in Section 5.2.3 of VMD0053. As the project proceeds and SOC 
stocks in the project scenario are periodically remeasured, data from true-up sampling should 
be added to the model calibration/validation dataset to update the estimate of model 
prediction error for the SOC pool (see Section 8.6.1.3 for additional details). An updated model 
validation report (MVR) must be re-submitted for assessment by an independent modeling 
expert. For other GHG fluxes that are modeled under Quantification Approach 1 (e.g., N2O, CH4), 
model prediction error should continue to be based on the use of statistical validation datasets 
but may be updated as new datasets become available that match the criteria outlined in 
VMD0053.  
Within a project, it is possible that different model prediction errors may be applicable to 
different portions of the project area. For example, a project may include areas where a cover 
crop is being implemented, and others where reduced tillage is being implemented, 
representing two different project scenarios for which model prediction error may differ. 
Similarly, a project may span a geographic area with varied climate and/or soil types across 
which model prediction error may differ. In such cases, different model prediction error terms 
most appropriate to a given quantification unit should be selected, and an aggregate estimate 
of model prediction error across the entire project must be determined using an estimator 
appropriate to the design.  
8.6.1.1.2 
Model Input and Measurement Error 
The ALM data used as model inputs may be an important source of error where details of such 
activities are not well known. However, as projects are expected to follow the data collection 
procedures outlined in Box 1 to determine ALM activities across the entire project area, this 
source of error is assumed to be sufficiently minor. Similarly, uncertainty related to estimation 
of area is considered to be negligible provided that GIS boundaries of the project area are 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 67 
 
 
accurately delineated and that the necessary QA/QC procedures to remove irrelevant features 
(e.g., streams, pavement, areas not under improved management) outlined in the parameter 
table for Ai are followed.  
Measurement error of physical properties (e.g., precipitation, soil texture) used as model inputs 
may also be a source of error, although this has generally been found to be less significant than 
model structural error (Ogle et al., 2010; Peltoniemi et al., 2006). Provided that measurement 
errors in model inputs translate to measurement errors in model predictions that are 
uncorrelated across sample points, these errors are automatically captured by the estimate of 
sample error discussed below.52 Similarly, for inputs such as precipitation, which are the same 
across baseline and project scenarios and for which estimates are retrieved for a given point 
from the same data source (e.g., GIS data products, digital soil maps), the influence of such 
measurement error on estimates of reductions and removals is captured in the estimate of 
model prediction error generated through model calibration/validation procedures. These 
procedures are described in the preceding section and in VMD0053. Remeasurement and true-
up provide additional opportunities to refine these error estimates.   
Where soil spectroscopy tools are used in place of conventional analytical techniques to 
determine SOC content at sampling points, it must not be assumed that measurement error 
from such methods is automatically captured in the estimate of model prediction error or that 
the impact of such errors is negligible. Soil spectroscopy methods may have high measurement 
error under different circumstances and may be biased (i.e., error differs depending on the 
carbon content of the sample under consideration and the coverage of datasets used to 
calibrate/validate the soil spectroscopy model). Biogeochemical models are sensitive to initial 
starting SOC content, meaning error in estimates will have a non-linear impact on model 
simulations of both the baseline and project scenarios. Therefore, where soil spectroscopy is 
used to determine SOC content data for use as an input to biogeochemical models, the MC 
simulation approach must be used, unless project proponents demonstrate that measurement 
error from the tool used is unbiased and has a de minimis impact on model simulations. 
Where uncertainty of ALM data or measurement error of other input data types is considered to 
have an impact on modeled estimates of reductions and removals despite use of best practices 
in data collection, the MC simulation method for error propagation should be used.   
8.6.1.1.3 
Sampling Error  
Sampling error derives from only measuring or modeling a subset of the entire project area, 
resulting in a potentially inaccurate estimate of the true variance of a GHG flux or carbon stock 
change. Sampling error is determined by calculating the approximate standard error of GHG 
fluxes or carbon stock changes as simulated by the model for a given verification period. The 
uncertainty estimator used must be based on the sampling design employed. All examples 
provided here assume that the default approach of measuring/modeling on a point basis is 
 
52 See, for example, Cochran (1977, p. 382); de Gruijter et al. (2006, p. 82); Som (1995, p. 438) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 68 
 
 
employed. Where alternative approaches are proposed via a methodology deviation, project 
proponents must provide evidence that the design is unbiased and must document use of the 
correct uncertainty estimator to capture sampling error (see also Section 8.2.1).  
This section is based on a stratified random sampling design in which the entire project is 
divided into strata and points are randomly allocated (with replacement) within the strata. Soil 
samples are collected at these points and the model is run. Formulae for uncertainty 
estimators are drawn from Som (1995, Ch. 10). Additional examples are provided in Appendix 
6. As stated in Section 8.2.1.2, project-specific strata, their area, and the sampling points 
within strata must be reported in a spreadsheet and submitted as an annex to project 
documentation at every verification. This information feeds into Equation (62) for the 
parameters stratum identifier (h), area of stratum (Ah), and sample point identifier (ip).  
 
𝑠s𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,Δ•,𝑡
2
= ∑ 𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,∆•,ℎ,𝑡
2
𝐻
ℎ=1
 
(62) 
Where:  
𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,Δ•,ℎ,𝑡
2
= 
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(∆•ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑡− ∆•ℎ,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅)
2
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
and: 
𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,Δ•,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of reductions and removals in gas or pool • due to 
sampling error at time t across the entire project area (t CO2e)2 
𝑠s𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,Δ•,ℎ,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of reductions and removals in gas or pool • within stratum 
h due to sampling error at time t (t CO2e)2 
Δ • ℎ,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean reductions and removals in gas or pool • in stratum h 
at time t, computed as the mean across the sample points in 
stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
∆•ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑡 
= Estimated reductions and removals of gas or pool • on an area 
basis in year t in stratum h at point ip (t CO2e/ha) 
h 
= 1, …, H strata across the entire project area 
ip 
= 1, …, nh sample points within stratum h 
Ah 
= Area of stratum h 
 
8.6.1.1.4 
Combined Sample and Model Error 
To incorporate model errors, assume that they are uncorrelated with the input data in the 
sample and are independent across samples. Then, the variance of Δ •𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅ incorporating sample 
uncertainty and model prediction uncertainty is estimated by combining the variance estimates 
of both error sources divided by the square of the total project area (Cochran, 1977 Eq. 13.39; 
Som, 1995 Eq. 25.10). Note that only the estimate of sampling error is divided by the square of 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 69 
 
 
the project area in this example as it is presumed that model prediction error has already been 
determined on an area basis per Equations (60)–(61). 
𝑠Δ•
̅̅̅̅,𝑡
2
=
𝑠s𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,Δ•,𝑡
2
 
𝐴2
+ 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 
(63) 
Where: 
𝑠Δ•
̅̅̅̅,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of mean reductions and removals from gas 
or pool • at time t (t CO2e/ha)2 
 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of reductions and removals in gas or pool 
• due to model prediction error (t CO2e/ha)2 
A 
= Total project area 
Lastly, 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 is an estimate of average variance of model prediction errors across the project 
and is estimated using an estimator appropriate to the project sampling design. In this 
example, it is assumed that the model prediction error value for each stratum is selected based 
on the specific project and baseline scenarios being implemented in that stratum and as such 
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 is estimated using an area-weighted uncertainty estimator. 
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
= ∑𝐴ℎ
2
𝐴2 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,ℎ
2
𝐻
ℎ=1
 
(64) 
 
8.6.1.2 Monte Carlo Simulation 
In addition to the analytical error propagation method detailed in Section 8.6.1.1, a Monte Carlo 
(MC) simulation method may be used for uncertainty estimation. MC simulation methods are 
commonly used in Bayesian analyses, which have gained popularity as a framework for 
estimating uncertainty of outputs from process-based biogeochemical models of soils and 
agroecosystems and estimating the uncertainty of biogeochemical model predictions (Gurung 
et al., 2020; Kennedy & O’Hagan, 2001). MC simulation methods are suitable for nonlinear, 
deterministic, process-based biogeochemical models (e.g., DayCent, DNDC). Unlike the 
analytical error propagation method, the MC method more easily addresses key dependencies 
in underlying data (such as correlation between model parameters) and asymmetric error 
distributions (such as non-negative or highly skewed distributions). The MC method is used in 
the USDA’s approach for estimating emissions at the farm scale (Eve et al., 2014) and in the US 
National GHG Inventory (US EPA, 2021). The approach is also described in peer-reviewed 
literature (Gurung et al., 2020; Ogle et al., 2007, 2010).  
For each sample point, a set of L random samples (total number of MC simulations) is drawn 
from a posterior predictive distribution (PPD) produced by the model. Within each quantification 
unit, the total set of PPDs across all points are then aggregated to determine the areal mean 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 70 
 
 
unbiased estimator of the reduction and removal estimates being evaluated and the 
uncertainty of those estimates. Random samples may also be taken from probability 
distribution functions of model input data, particularly where those inputs have measurement 
error that is not accounted for in the model validation process. 
To generate a PPD, Bayesian calibration methods must be used to estimate model parameters 
as probability distribution functions (as opposed to single values). To ensure parity with the 
analytical error propagation method detailed in Section 8.6.1.1, these probability distribution 
functions of model parameters must be determined per the model calibration/validation 
guidance in VMD0053 using external datasets representative of the project area and activities 
or, in the case of SOC, using remeasured project SOC stocks (see Section 8.6.1.3). In other 
words, the likelihood function from which the PPD is sampled must be based on the same 
dataset against which the model is statistically validated. Steps to calibrate and validate a 
model for use with the MC uncertainty propagation method must be documented in a model 
validation report following the guidance in VMD0053. 
Since many biogeochemical models include dozens of parameters, not all parameters are 
expected to be calibrated as probability distribution functions. Instead, a more limited number 
of parameters may be used for MC simulation, for instance identified through sensitivity 
analysis. In the simplest implementation, a single parameter representing residual model 
prediction error may be used. In such cases, MC simulation is implemented using a “meta-
model” that represents uncertainty in the chosen set of parameters but does not necessarily 
require direct modification of model source code. Kennedy and O’Hagan (2001) provide 
additional detail on relevant calibration methods and Gurung et al. (2020) provide an example 
of such methods being specifically implemented for a soil biogeochemical model. Gelman et al. 
(2014) is a useful reference on Bayesian statistical methods and provides additional detail on 
definitions of PPDs and valid methods to generate them.  
The notation in this section is different than in previous sections, aligning with notation 
commonly used in Bayesian statistics. Key differences include:  
• 
The observed outcome of interest (i.e., reductions and removals) is denoted as y, which 
is commonly used in statistics to denote outcomes. 
• 
MC draws of model-predicted reductions and removals are denoted as 𝑦̃. The tilde 
serves as a reminder that 𝑦̃ is a model prediction drawn from a PPD (following standard 
notation in Gelman et al., 2014; Hoff, 2009) due to the use of Bayesian calibration 
(Kennedy & O’Hagan, 2001).  
• 
Total reductions and removals and areal mean reductions and removals are denoted as 
𝜏 and 𝜇, respectively, in keeping with Thompson (2012). The use of lowercase Greek 
letters is also a reminder that the estimand of interest (true total and areal mean 
reductions and removals) cannot be directly observed due to measurement error. 
• 
The notation in this section suppresses notation for verification period t for convenience 
and to avoid confusion with the Greek character 𝜏 (total reductions and removals) 
which is used throughout.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 71 
 
 
• 
Var is used in place of s2 in multiple locations to signify variance to more easily match 
Equation (68), which describes how variance is broken down into sampling and 
modeling error.  
8.6.1.2.1 Combined Sample and Model Error 
For a particular time period and GHG emission source, the estimand, or target parameter of 
interest, is the true total reductions and removals across the entire project, denoted as 𝜏, in 
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2e). The estimate of 𝜏 produced through MC 
simulation is denoted by 𝜏 . Similarly, the areal mean reductions and removals is denoted by 𝜇 
(equivalent to ∆•𝑡) in t CO2e/ha. Estimates of 𝜇 are denoted as 𝜇 . Since model prediction error 
is implicitly incorporated into the MC simulations through parameter uncertainty, these 
estimates may then be used to estimate sampling and model prediction error based on the 
realized sample s and the sampling design employed. Here, an example of this process is 
provided, using the same stratified random sample design demonstrated in Section 8.6.1. 
Additional examples are provided in Appendix 6.  
First, to generate an estimate (𝜏 ) of 𝜏, GHG emissions are simulated under the baseline and 
project scenarios multiple times at each sample point, indexed by 𝑙 = 1, ..., 𝐿. The reductions 
and removals at each point are then calculated as the difference between predicted GHG 
emissions under baseline and project scenarios. These estimates are used to produce an 
estimate of reductions and removals (𝑦̃) at each point, similarly indexed by 𝑙 following Equation 
(65) below. 
𝑦̃ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙= 𝑧̃𝑏𝑠𝑙,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙− 𝑧̃𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 
(65) 
 
Where: 
𝑦̃ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 
= Predicted reductions and removals on an area basis for point i in 
stratum h and MC simulation 𝑙 (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑧̃𝑏𝑠𝑙,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 
= Predicted GHG emissions in the baseline scenario on an area 
basis for point ip in stratum h and MC simulation 𝑙 (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑧̃𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 
= Predicted GHG emissions in the project scenario on an area basis 
for point ip in stratum h and MC simulation 𝑙 (t CO2e/ha) 
l 
= 1, …, L MC simulations 
 
Note – notation for the source of emissions and time period is suppressed. The sign convention 
is that 𝑧̃𝑏𝑠𝑙,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 is emissions to the atmosphere in the baseline scenario. Thus, for the SOC pool, 
𝑧̃𝑏𝑠𝑙,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 is −1 times the predicted temporal change in SOC stocks in the baseline scenario. 
Similarly, 𝑧̃𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙 is −1 times the predicted temporal change in the project scenario. 
The total set of L estimates of 𝑦̃ are then used to produce 𝑡  and 𝜇 , according to Equation (66).  
𝜇 = 𝜏 
𝐴 
(66) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 72 
 
 
 
Where: 
𝜏 = ∑𝜏 ℎ
𝐻
ℎ=1
 
𝜏 ℎ= 𝐴ℎ
𝑛ℎ𝐿∑(∑𝑦̃ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
)
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
and: 
𝜏  
= Monte Carlo estimate (MC mean) of total reductions and removals 
for a given source across the whole project area (t CO2e) 
𝜇  
= Areal mean unbiased estimator of reductions and removals for gas 
or pool • in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝜏 ℎ 
= Monte Carlo estimate (MC mean) of reductions and removals for a 
given source within stratum h (t CO2e) 
 
The total uncertainty is then decomposed into two components, sampling and modeling 
uncertainty. Using standard variance decomposition (i.e., the law of total variance) following Del 
Grosso et al. (2010), the total variance is decomposed according to Equation (67). 
Var(𝜏 ) = 𝔼[Var(𝜏 |𝒔)] + Var(𝔼[𝜏 |𝒔]) 
(67) 
Where: 
𝔼[Var(𝜏 |𝒔)]  
= Estimate of model uncertainty (i.e., expectation of the conditional 
variance given the sample design) 
Var(𝔼[𝜏 |𝒔]) 
= Estimate of uncertainty due to sampling design (i.e., variance of the 
conditional expectation) 
s 
= The realized sample, selected using the sample design 
For the stratified random sampling design used in this example, the variance components are 
estimated according to the following system of equations. Note that these are similar in form to 
those in Section 8.6.1 and are derived from Som (1995, Ch. 10). 
𝑉𝑎𝑟
̂ (𝜏 ) = 𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔
2
+  𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
= {∑𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ
2
𝐻
ℎ=1
} + 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 
(68) 
Where: 
𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ
2
=
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(𝑦̂ℎ,𝑖𝑝−𝜇 ℎ)
2
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 73 
 
 
𝑦̂ℎ,𝑖𝑝= 1
𝐿∑𝑦̃ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
 
𝜇 ℎ= 𝜏 ℎ
𝐴ℎ
 
and: 
𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
=
1
𝐿−1 ∑(𝜏̃𝑙−𝜏 )2
𝐿
𝑙=1
 
𝜏̃𝑙= ∑𝜏̃ℎ,𝑙
𝐻
ℎ=1
 
𝜏̃ℎ,𝑙= 𝐴ℎ
𝑛ℎ
∑𝑦̃ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑙
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
  
and: 
𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔
2
 
= Variance of reductions and removals in gas or pool • due to sampling 
error at time t (notation suppressed) across the entire project area 
(t CO2e)2 
𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ
2
 
= Variance of reductions and removals in gas or pool • within stratum h 
due to sampling error at time t (notation suppressed) (t CO2e)2 
𝜏̃𝑙 
= Total reductions and removals for the 𝑙th MC simulation of the project 
(t CO2e) 
𝜏̃ℎ𝑙 
= Total reductions and removals in stratum h for the 𝑙th MC simulation 
(t CO2e) 
𝑦̂ℎ,𝑖𝑝 
= MC estimate of areal mean reductions and removals for point ip in 
stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
𝜇 ℎ 
= MC estimate of areal mean reductions and removals in stratum h 
(t CO2e/ha)  
 
Last, the variance of the mean reductions and removals (Var
̂ (𝜇 )) is obtained by dividing Var
̂ (𝜏 ) 
by the square of the total project area (A2). 
𝑉𝑎𝑟
̂ (𝜇 ) = 𝑠∆•
̅̅̅
2 = 
𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔
2
+ 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
𝐴2
 
(69) 
 
In Equations (68)–(69), the sampling variance may be calculated separately for each stratum 
and then summed together, because the sampled points are selected independently in 
different strata (see Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 of Cochran, 1977, pp. 91–92). In contrast, model 
prediction errors may not be independent across strata due to shared calibration parameters. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 74 
 
 
Thus, estimation of model variance must not be split across strata and is instead estimated 
across the entire project area. Unlike in Equation (63), the model prediction error (𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
) must 
be divided by the square of the project area because in this example it is estimated on the 
basis of total reductions and removals achieved across the entire project area.  
8.6.1.2.2 Monte Carlo Propagation of Model Input Error 
Monte Carlo error propagation methods may be used in some cases to propagate model input 
errors alone. In Section 8.6.1.2, these errors are identified as being otherwise captured in 
estimates of sample or model prediction error. However, in some circumstances, such as when 
land management data are uncertain or soil spectroscopy tools are used to measure initial 
SOC, these errors may not be captured in those terms. MC error propagation is appropriate in 
such cases and need not require recalibration of soil model parameters. In such cases, the 
measurement errors are propagated to the sampling error term, which should be determined 
according to the procedures outlined in Equations (65)–(68) that relate to sampling error. For 
example, MC simulations would entail sampling from a PPD of estimated SOC content for a 
given point based on a chosen soil spectroscopy method (see Appendix 4 for additional details), 
and those values would be used to initialize the process-based model. Model prediction error 
may be determined using either the analytical error propagation method or the MC simulation 
method and is added to the estimate of sampling error to provide an estimate of the total 
uncertainty for a given emission reduction or removal. 
8.6.1.2.3 Monte Carlo Error 
The accuracy of the MC estimates depends on the number of independent MC draws. Where 
MC draws use a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm such as the No-U-Turn Sampler 
implemented in Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017), samples may contain some autocorrelation and 
thus the MC error depends on an effective sample size that is smaller than the initial number of 
chosen draws. The MC error (errors due to using a finite number of MC draws) decreases with 
increasing number of MC draws. According to Gelman et al. (2014, p. 267), the contribution of 
MC error to MC estimates of standard error is √1 + 1/𝐿. For L = 100 independent MC draws, 
MC error would inflate the standard error by a factor of only 1.005, implying that the MC error 
adds almost nothing to the uncertainty estimation. More than 100 simulations may add 
numerical stability to estimates, particularly for the percentile summaries. Gelman et al. (2014) 
suggest a choice of L between 100 and 2000. A value between 500 and 1000 is suggested to 
balance accuracy and computing power demand. 
8.6.1.3 Remeasurement, Model True-Up and Cumulative Modeling 
As outlined in Section 8.3, SOC stocks must be directly remeasured every five years in the 
project scenario. These data are used to re-estimate model prediction error and/or recalibrate 
the model in relation to measured SOC stocks.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 75 
 
 
Prior to remeasurement, model structural error during simulation of SOC stocks for initial model 
validation will be based be based on data from peer-reviewed publications and available 
datasets meeting the requirements detailed in Section 5.2.3 of VMD0053. Specifically, the 
model is used to simulate changes in stocks from a set of selected external datasets (i.e., field 
trials for which data have been previously collected). Following remeasurement (i.e., true-up 
sampling), data from external datasets and remeasurement within the project area are 
combined to create a new calibration/validation. If the project proponent so chooses, this 
dataset may be used to recalibrate model parameters (or parameter distributions in the case of 
Bayesian models) in an effort to improve model accuracy, although model recalibration is not 
required. Following remeasurement, project proponents must repeat model validation 
procedures outlined in VMD0053, submit an updated MVR for review and validation, and 34 
update the model prediction error term used in the estimation of the project uncertainty 
deduction.  
Once the MVR is approved, project proponents should rerun model simulations for both the 
baseline and project scenarios from t0 up to the present day and recalculate uncertainty 
deductions to be applied to future credit vintages. VCUs that have been issued in previous 
verifications will remain unchanged. 
8.6.2 Quantification Approach 2 
Quantification Approach 2 is applicable for SOC stocks only. The baseline is represented by 
control sites that are linked to one or more project quantification units. The SOC stock 
difference and its uncertainty is calculated based on comparisons of control sites and paired 
project quantification units. Key sources of error accounted for under Quantification Approach 2 
include: 
• 
Sampling error resulting from measuring/modeling only a portion of the project area  
• 
Measurement error of methods used to determine SOC stock equivalents (t C02e per 
unit area) at sample points. Where samples are collected using ESM approaches and 
analyzed using dry combustion via a lab with demonstrated proficiency and quality 
control (e.g., through participation in the North American Proficiency Testing 
program53), these errors are assumed to be unbiased and negligible. Where alternative 
measurement approaches such as soil spectroscopy techniques are used, 
measurement error must be estimated and propagated through estimates of the total 
change in SOC.  
These sources of error are estimated separately and then combined to estimate a single 
uncertainty deduction for SOC stocks across the entire project. Similar to Quantification 
Approach 1, an analytical error propagation or MC simulation method may be used. The MC 
 
53 Available at: https://www.naptprogram.org/ 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 76 
 
 
simulation method is only applicable in cases where measurement error is deemed significant 
and must be propagated through calculations.  
As in Section 8.6.1, an example is provided here based on the default stratified random 
sampling approach. In this example, each individual stratum is paired with an appropriately 
determined control site. Net SOC stock changes in the project scenario are determined by 
comparing net change in SOC in project sites against net change in baseline control sites over a 
given verification period t, determined through direct sampling and dry combustion analysis of 
soil samples collected at the beginning and end of period t. It is assumed that the same set of 
sample points are visited at both time points. 
The total variance of the SOC stock change estimate is then determined using an area-weighted 
uncertainty estimator based on the variance of SOC stock change estimates in each stratum. 
Variance of SOC stock change estimates in each stratum are based on the combined variance 
of the estimates of change over time in a given verification period t for both the project and 
baseline scenarios. The covariance of these estimates is conservatively excluded as the 
baseline control sites and project sites are assumed to be independent. In these equations, Δ is 
used to signify reductions and removals in the SOC pool (i.e., project scenario SOC stocks 
minus baseline scenario SOC stocks) and changes in SOC stocks over time in both the baseline 
and project scenarios.  
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2
= 1
𝐴2 ∑ 𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,ℎ,𝑡
2
𝑛
1
 
(70) 
Where: 
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,ℎ,𝑡
2
= 𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑡
2
+ 𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑏𝑠𝑙,ℎ,𝑡
2
  
and: 
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of mean SOC stock changes in verification 
period t across the entire project area, calculated as the difference in 
net change between the project and baseline scenarios over period t 
(t CO2e/ha)2 
𝑠∆SOC,ℎ,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of total SOC stock changes in verification 
period t in stratum h, calculated as the difference in net change 
between the project and baseline scenarios over period t (t CO2e)2 
𝑠∆SOC,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of total SOC stock changes in the project plots 
in verification period t in stratum h, calculated as the difference in SOC 
stocks at the beginning and end of period t (t CO2e)2 
𝑠∆SOC,𝑏𝑠𝑙,ℎ,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of total SOC stock changes in baseline 
(control) plots paired with project stratum h in verification period t, 
calculated as the difference in SOC stocks at the beginning and end of 
period t (t CO2e)2 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 77 
 
 
Note that the area-weighting in Equation (70) is based on the area of the project strata, not the 
baseline control sites with which they are paired.  
Because the sample design for the project and baseline control plots may be different, the 
uncertainty estimator should match the sample design used in the project and baseline control 
plots. For example, the project area may be monitored using a staged design if there are a 
substantial number of quantification units (e.g., fields) in the project area. But the baseline 
control plots may be fewer, meaning they can all be monitored and do not require a staged 
design. In such cases, baseline and project areas should use different uncertainty estimators 
before estimating the combined uncertainty. This example presumes that within each stratum, 
sample points are similarly determined using simple random sampling with replacement for 
both baseline and project scenarios, so the estimator in both scenarios is the same.  
Equation (71) provides an example for the project scenario. The variance of the estimate of the 
change is then a function of the variance and covariance of soil sampling results at both time 
points within verification period t. These time points are denoted as tfinal and tstart,  hereafter 
shortened to subscripts f and s. 
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑡
2
= 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓
2
+ 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠
2
− 2𝐶𝑂𝑉(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 ; 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠)     
(71) 
Where: 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓
2
=
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓)
2
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠
2
=
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑠− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠)
2
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
𝐶𝑂𝑉(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 ; 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠)
= 
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑠− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠)
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓) 
and: 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of SOC stocks in the project 
scenario at tfinal in stratum h (t CO2e)2 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of SOC stocks in the project 
scenario at tstart in stratum h (t CO2e)2 
𝐶𝑂𝑉(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 ; 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠) = Covariance of estimates of SOC stocks at tfinal and tstart in the 
project scenario in stratum h (t CO2e)2 
𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 
= Mean estimate of SOC stocks across all points in the project 
scenario at tfinal in stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠 
= Mean estimate of SOC stocks across all points in the project 
scenario at tstart in stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 78 
 
 
SOCwp,h,ip,f 
= Estimated SOC stock on an area basis at point ip in the 
project scenario at tfinal in stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
SOCwp,h,ip,s 
= Estimated SOC stock on an area basis at point ip in the 
project scenario at tstart in stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
 
8.6.2.1 Alternative SOC Measurement Methods 
Projects may elect to use alternative measurement methods to determine SOC content at each 
sample point, such as Vis-NIR and MIR (see Appendix 4). Such methods may reduce sampling 
error by allowing for data collection at a greater number of points. However, they introduce error 
into the estimation of reductions and removals through the model used to estimate SOC based 
on reflectance/absorbance data from the chosen instrument. This error is handled using MC 
simulation methods similar to those in Quantification Approach 1. The value of SOC at each 
point is iteratively resampled L times from a PPD derived from a soil spectroscopy model 
calibrated and validated with an independent dataset appropriate to the project area. 
Alternatively, the project proponent may estimate the error of the spectroscopy model by 
selecting 10–15% of samples in the project, analyzing these samples using dry combustion 
methods, and comparing those results to the spectroscopy model predictions. See Appendix 4 
for additional detail on how these models should be calibrated and statistically validated, as 
well as how PPDs should be developed where an MC simulation approach is applied.  
In either case, uncertainty is estimated using a similar overall form as the procedures outlined 
in Equations (70) and (71), but the uncertainty estimators in Equation (71) for estimating 
uncertainty within an individual stratum are modified to include both sampling error and model 
error from the soil spectroscopy model. Equation (72) provides an example using the MC 
simulation approach for the project scenario in a given stratum h. Individual estimates of SOC 
content at each soil sampling point are sampled from a PPD L times and compared to the mean 
estimate of SOC across all L simulations to generate uncertainty estimates.  
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑡
2
= 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓
2
+ 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠
2
− 2𝐶𝑂𝑉(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 ; 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠) 
(72) 
 
The variance of an individual stratum is estimated as follows. The same equation form applies 
to time point s. 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓
2
= 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
2
+ 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
2
= 
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓)
2
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
  
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓= 1
𝐿∑𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓,𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 79 
 
 
𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓= 1
𝐴ℎ
∑𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
=
1
𝐿−1 ∑(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑓,𝑙− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,𝑓)
2
𝐿
𝑙=1
 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑓,𝑙= ∑𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑙
𝐻
ℎ=1
 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑙= 𝐴ℎ
𝑛ℎ
∑𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑖𝑝,𝑙
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
  
𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,𝑓= 1
𝐿∑𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑓,𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
 
𝐶𝑂𝑉(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 ; 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠)
= 1
𝐿∑{
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑠,𝑙− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑠)
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
(𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑓,𝑙
𝐿
𝑙=1
− 𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓)} 
Where: 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of SOC stocks in the project 
scenario at tfinal in stratum h attributable to sampling error 
(t CO2e)2 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of SOC stocks in the project 
scenario at tfinal in stratum h attributable to prediction error 
of the soil spectroscopy model (t CO2e)2 
𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓 
= Mean estimate of SOC stocks across all points in the project 
scenario at tfinal in stratum h in the 𝑙th simulation 
(t CO2e/ha) 
SOCwp,h,ip,f,l 
= Estimated SOC stocks on an area basis at point ip in the 
project scenario at tfinal in stratum h in the 𝑙th simulation 
(t CO2e/ha) 
SOCwp,h,ip,s,l 
= Estimated SOC stocks on an area basis at point ip in the 
project scenario at tstart in stratum h in the 𝑙th simulation 
(t CO2e/ha) 
SOCwp,f,l 
= Estimate of total SOC stocks on an area basis in the project 
scenario across the entire project at tfinal in the 𝑙th 
simulation (t CO2e) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 80 
 
 
𝑆𝑂𝐶
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑤𝑝,𝑓  
= Mean estimate of total SOC stocks in the project scenario 
across the entire project at tfinal averaged across all 𝐿 
simulations (t CO2e) 
Where a project proponent elects not to use the MC simulation approach and instead estimate 
model error using a simple frequentist approach, then 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ𝑓,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 in Equation (72) is 
replaced with an estimate of model prediction error that is the same across all strata and both 
scenarios, 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
. This estimate is determined by comparing modeled estimates of SOC to 
values determined through laboratory analysis (Appendix 4).  
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
= 
𝐴2
𝑡𝑣𝑑−1 ∑(𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑝𝑣𝑑−𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟)
2
𝑡𝑣𝑑
𝑝𝑣𝑑=1
 
(73) 
𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑝𝑣𝑑= 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,𝑝𝑣𝑑− 𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑜𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑑,𝑝𝑣𝑑 
𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟= 1
𝑡𝑣𝑑∑𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑝𝑣𝑑
𝑡𝑣𝑑
𝑝𝑣𝑑=1
 
Where: 
𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
2
 
= Variance of the estimate of SOC stocks attributable to 
prediction error of the soil spectroscopy model (t CO2e)2 
𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑝𝑣𝑑 
= Difference between the predicted estimate of SOC on an area 
basis and observed SOC at point pvd in the randomly selected 
statistical validation dataset (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 
= Mean of all estimates of errorpvd across all tvd points in the 
statistical validation dataset (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,𝑝𝑣𝑑  
= Predicted estimate of SOC on an area basis at point pvd in the 
randomly selected statistical validation dataset (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑆𝑂𝐶𝑜𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑑,𝑝𝑣𝑑  
= Observed SOC on an area basis at point pvd in the randomly 
selected statistical validation dataset, determined through 
conventional lab analysis and field sampling (t CO2e/ha) 
pvd 
= 1, …, tvd sample points within the statistical validation dataset 
 
Furthermore, 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓,𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
2
 should be determined using the same equation as is used to 
determine 𝑠𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑤𝑝,ℎ,𝑓
2
 in Equation (71), but individual point values are instead the value for that 
point as predicted by the soil spectroscopy model.  
8.6.2.2 Extensions to Other Sampling Designs 
In this simplified example, it is assumed that a single control plot or area is sufficient to 
represent the baseline scenario for each stratum and that the same soil sampling points can 
be revisited at both time points. In practice, such assumptions may not hold true in many 
projects developed under this methodology. Nonetheless, the overall process for estimating the 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 81 
 
 
total variance of the estimate of change should be similar to the example provided above. 
Equations used to estimate the individual component terms are likely to differ. As with 
Quantification Approach 1, an additional example is provided in Appendix 6 based on a multi-
stage sampling design where stratified random sampling is employed at the final stage when 
determining location of sampling points.  
8.6.3 Quantification Approach 3 
In Quantification Approach 3, reductions and removals are estimated using emission factors 
(EF) determined to be most relevant for the project area (see Section 8.3 for additional details 
on EF selection). Whenever available, disaggregated values which are best applicable to the 
project area, project conditions, and project activity must be used. While these EFs are likely to 
include some prediction error, availability of source data for estimating that error may be 
inconsistent.  
Project proponents must use the available EF that results in the most conservative reduction 
and removal estimates when applied across both the baseline and project scenarios. For 
example, IPCC (2019) provides 0.016 as the default emission factor to estimate N2O emissions 
from managed soils resulting from synthetic fertilizer inputs in wet climates with an uncertainty 
range of 0.013–0.019. To yield the most conservative result, quantification of baseline and 
project scenario emissions must apply 0.013 (the lowest value in the uncertainty range) when 
project emission sources decrease relative to the baseline. When emission sources increase in 
the project scenario relative to the baseline, projects must apply 0.019 (the highest value in the 
uncertainty range). 
It is expected that management data is collected across all quantification units in the project 
area according to the hierarchy outlined in Box 1, and as such sampling error does not factor 
into uncertainty deductions. However, where management data cannot be collected across the 
entire project area, sampling error must be accounted. In this case, the procedures for 
estimating sampling error in Quantification Approach 1 must be followed (see Section 8.6.1). 
The uncertainty estimators must be based on the sampling design used. Project proponents 
must provide a description of the sampling design and a justification as to why management 
data are not collected across all quantification units.  
8.6.4 Uncertainty Deductions 
Uncertainty deductions are estimated and applied separately for each reduction and removal 
source within the project boundary. This deduction is estimated using a probability of 
exceedance method as follows (see the most recent version of the VCS Methodology 
Requirements Section 2.4): 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 82 
 
 
𝑈𝑁𝐶∆·̅,𝑡= 
(
 
 √𝑠∆·̅ ,𝑡
2
∆·
̅̅̅̅𝑡
 ×  100
)
 × 𝑡0.667 
(74) 
 
Where: 
𝑈𝑁𝐶∆·̅,𝑡 
= Uncertainty deduction for each GHG or C pool • to be applied in 
verification period t (%) 
∆·
̅̅̅̅𝑡 
= Mean ERR for each GHG or C pool • across the entire project area in 
year t (t CO2e/ha) 
𝑠∆·̅ ,𝑡
2  
= Variance of the mean ERR estimate from each GHG or C pool • at time 
t. See Figure 4 to determine how this is estimated based on the 
methods employed in the project (t CO2e/ha)2  
t0.667 
= t-value for a one-sided student’s t-distribution at 0.667 (66.7%) 
confidence interval with degrees of freedom appropriate to the 
sampling design used. Equal to approximately 0.4307 at large sample 
sizes (dimensionless) 
This uncertainty deduction is based on a defined threshold in the estimated probability density 
function of the reduction or removal for a given source. This enables a judgement of the extent 
to which the achieved reduction or removal by the project may be expected to be accurate. By 
this procedure, one estimates what percentage of the estimates of ∆·
̅̅̅̅𝑡 would have a 66.6% 
probability of exceeding the true value of ∆·
̅̅̅̅𝑡. That percentage is then used as the uncertainty 
deduction. Figure 4 demonstrates this concept. 
Figure 4: Probability of exceedance. The value for ∆·
̅̅̅̅𝒕 used in calculation of VCUs 
issued is determined by applying an uncertainty deduction based on the 33.3rd 
percentile of the estimated probability distribution of ∆·
̅̅̅̅𝒕 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 84 
 
 
Figure 5: Equation map for calculating uncertainty deduction under Quantification 
Approaches 1 (for SOC, CH4, and N2O) and 2 (for SOC)54 
 
  
 
8.7 
Calculation of Verified Carbon Units 
To calculate the number of Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) that may be issued, the project 
proponent must consider the number of buffer credits that must be deposited in the AFOLU 
pooled buffer account. The number of buffer credits that must be deposited is calculated by 
multiplying the non-permanence risk rating by the net change in carbon stocks (see most 
recent version of the VCS Standard55). The buffer credits are quantified as:  
𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡=  𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) × ( MIN(0,Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −MIN(0,Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)) × 𝑁𝑃𝑅% + (1
−𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝)) ×  ( MIN(0,Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −MIN(0,Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)
+  MAX(0,Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) − MAX(0,Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)) × 𝑁𝑃𝑅% 
(75) 
Where: 
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 1 if  ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡> 0
𝑡
1
 and;  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 0 if ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡≤0
𝑡
1
 
 
54 Note that where a sample design other than the default stratified random sampling approach (see Section 8.2.1) is 
proposed via a methodology deviation, these equations should not be used but the general workflow is the same. 
55 For example, this is included in Section 3.2.10 of the VCS Standard, v4.7. 
QA 1
Applicable to SOC, and CH4 and N2O from 
soil as indicated in Table 5
Analytical error 
propagation
Eqs. 60-64
𝑠̅∆∙,𝑡
2
Uncertainty 
deduction
Eq. 74
MC simulation
Eqs. 65-69
𝑠̅∆∙,𝑡
2
Uncertainty 
deduction
Eq. 74
QA 2
Applicable only to SOC
Conventional lab 
analysis
Eqs. 70-71
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑡
2
Uncertainty 
deduction
Eq. 74
Proximal sensing 
methods
Eqs. 70 & 72 or 73
𝑠∆𝑆𝑂𝐶,𝑡
2
Uncertainty 
deduction
Eq. 74
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 85 
 
 
𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡 
= 
Buffer credits to be deducted from reductions in year t (t CO2e) 
 
𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡=   𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) × ( 𝑀𝐴𝑋(0, Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡) −𝑀𝐴𝑋(0, Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑡)) × 𝑁𝑃𝑅% 
(76) 
Where: 
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 1 if  ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡> 0
𝑡
1
 and;  
𝐼(Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝) = 0 if ∑ Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡≤0
𝑡
1
 
𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡 
= 
Buffer credits to be deducted from removals in year t (t CO2e) 
Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑤𝑝,𝑡 
= 
Total carbon stock change in the project scenario in year t (t CO2e) 
Δ𝐶𝑂2𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= 
Total carbon stock change in the baseline scenario in year t (t CO2e) 
𝑁𝑃𝑅% 
= 
Overall project non-permanence risk rating converted to a percentage 
The number of VCUs resulting from project activities leading to reductions that may be issued in 
year t is calculated as: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐸𝑅,𝑡= 𝐸𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡−𝐵𝑢𝐸𝑅,𝑡 
(77) 
Where: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐸𝑅,𝑡 
= Number of Verified Carbon Units resulting from project activities 
leading to reductions in year t 
𝐸𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡 
= Estimated net reductions in year t (t CO2e) 
The number of VCUs resulting from project activities leading to removals that may be issued in 
year t is calculated as: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑅,𝑡= 𝐶𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡−𝐵𝑢𝐶𝑅,𝑡 
(78) 
Where: 
𝑉𝐶𝐶𝑅,𝑡 
= Number of Verified Carbon Units resulting from project activities 
leading to removals in year t 
𝐶𝑅𝑁𝐸𝑇,𝑡 
= Estimated net removals in year t (t CO2e) 
The number of VCUs that may be issued in year t is calculated as: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝑡= 𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐸𝑅,𝑡+ 𝑉𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑅,𝑡 
(79) 
Where: 
VCUt 
= Number of VCUs in year t (t CO2e) 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 86