7 ADDITIONALITY 
All projects must demonstrate regulatory surplus (Section 7.1).  
Project activities in Category D must demonstrate additionality by applying the project method, 
either conducting an investment or barrier analysis, and a common practice analysis 
(Section 7.2).  
Project activities in Category A, B, or C must demonstrate additionality by applying the 
performance method that incorporates the dynamic performance benchmark (Section 7.3). 
7.1 
Regulatory Surplus (Categories A, B, C and D) 
The project proponent must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent versions of the VCS 
Standard and VCS Methodology Requirements. 
The regulatory surplus must be assessed for each of the weatherization and energy efficiency 
measures included in the project activity. 
Where the project activity demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to the project method 
(Category D) or performance method (Categories A, B and C). Otherwise, the project activity is 
not additional.   
7.2 
Project Method  (Category D) 
7.2.1 Barrier analysis and/or investment analysis  
Project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of the most recent version of 
VT0008 Additionality Assessment to conduct either a barrier analysis (Step 2 of the tool) or an 
investment analysis (Step 3 of the tool). Project proponents may choose to apply both analyses 
to further strengthen the additionality demonstration.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
13 
Where the project activity demonstrates that all conditions of either the barrier analysis or the 
investment analysis per VT0008 are met, proceed to the next step (common practice analysis). 
Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
7.2.2 Common practice analysis 
Project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of either Step 4b or 4c of the 
most recent version of VT0008 Additionality Assessment to conduct the common practice 
analysis.  
Where the project activity satisfies all previous steps and demonstrates that it is not common 
practice, it is additional. Otherwise, the project activity is not additional. 
7.3 
Performance Method (Categories A, B and C) 
Category A. All energy retrofit: The percent savings in the pre- and post-retrofit energy load of 
each dwelling in the project must be equal to or greater than the performance benchmark. The 
performance benchmark is a value above average performance that represents a percent 
savings in energy consumption that dwellings are not likely to reach with 80% confidence in the 
absence of the project. The average performance is the annual average percent savings in 
weather-normalized energy consumption in dwellings from the same building stock over the 
three most recent years for which data are available11. Dwellings weatherized as part of the 
project may be excluded.  
Category B. Efficiency enhancement of the building envelope and/or central heating/cooling 
system: The percent savings in the pre- and post-retrofit energy load of each dwelling in the 
project must be equal to or greater than the performance benchmark. The performance 
benchmark is the same as defined in Category A. Although Category B comprises measures to 
the building envelope only, the same performance benchmark can be used if the percent 
savings is calculated for the entire energy consumption of the dwelling and not just for the 
consumption of heating and cooling energy. This way, savings achieved under the project are 
comparable to overall trends. By broadening the base, savings from the project are diluted. 
They would be higher if calculated for the savings in heat and cooling energy alone. 
The performance benchmark for Category A and Category B, x, must be calculated as follows:12 
For data following a normal distribution:  
The performance benchmark is based on the standard deviation of the sample.  
𝑥= ܽ+ 0.84ߪ  
(1) 
 
11 Energy Load must be used to determine whether the dwelling is additional because the energy load is established during 
the energy audit. Energy consumption is used to calculate the mean percent savings within the same building stock because 
that is the data available. Energy load and energy consumption may be used in conjunction because energy consumption 
may be projected based on energy load.  
12 Under a normal distribution, the mean plus 2σ encompasses ~97.5% of the statistical sample.. A 80% likelihood of the data 
falling below the value x is calculated as the mean plus 0.84 σ.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
14 
Where:  
x 
= 
Performance benchmark 
a 
= 
Average performance13  
σ 
= 
Standard deviation (sigma) of the percent savings in the same building stock 
energy load 
For data not following a normal distribution:  
The performance benchmark is equal to the 80th percentile value within the numerically 
ordered sample. To calculate the 80th percentile, the sample data point values (v1, v2…vN) must 
be ordered from smallest to largest (ascending order). The 80th percentile value is equal to the 
value of the data point with the rank at which 80% of the data falls below.  
To be additional, dwellings must satisfy the following condition: 
ா௅ುೝ೐,೔−ா௅ು೚ೞ೟,೔
ா௅ುೝ೐,೔
∗100 ≥𝑥  
(2) 
Where:  
x 
= 
Performance benchmark; value of the data point at rank n 
ELpre,i = 
Pre-retrofit energy load of dwelling i 
ELpre,i = 
Post-retrofit energy load of dwelling i 
 
Figure 1 shows the percent savings in energy consumption of buildings and dwellings within the 
same building stock. The percent savings is calculated from the change in weather-normalized 
energy consumption in dwellings from the same building stock over at least the three most 
recent years for which data are available. The average performance, on which the performance 
benchmark is based, is calculated from these data. Dwellings with a high percent savings in 
energy consumption will fall to the right of the average performance, and dwellings with a low 
percent savings in energy consumption will fall to the left of the average performance.  
 
13 To correct for any potential increase in electricity consumption due to an increase in electric appliances, the statewide 
percent increase in electricity consumption, as reported by the US Department of Energy or other recognized authority, will be 
added to the value of the average performance to make the performance benchmark even more rigorous and conservative if 
such electricity data are reasonably available and it is feasible to do so. For example, in the US the value of the increase in 
regional electricity consumption may be obtained from the following website: 
http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/states/state_information.cfm  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
15 
Figure 1. Percent savings in same building stock energy consumption 
 
Figure 2 shows how the performance benchmark (vertical red line to the right) is calculated by 
determining the average performance (vertical solid blue line), defined as the annual average 
of the percent savings in weather-normalized energy consumption in the same building stock 
over the past three years, and adding 0.84σ . The standard deviation (σ) is calculated from the 
actual data obtained from the same building stock within the past three years. The numbers 
along the horizontal axis represent the number of standard deviations from the average value 
(average performance). For example, the data point 7% falls in line with 2σ, which means that 
7% is two standard deviations away from the average performance, meaning that 97.5% of all 
buildings do not reach a 7% savings in energy consumption or higher.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
16 
Figure 2. Performance benchmark for categories A and B 
 
The parameters to be monitored for calculating the average performance and standard 
deviation for Category A and Category B are listed in Section 9. 
Category C. Replacement of appliances: the energy consumption of the replacement appliance 
must meet or fall below the performance benchmark. The performance benchmark is a value 
below the average performance that represents a level of energy consumption per appliance 
that appliances are not likely to reach with 80% confidence in the absence of the project. The 
average performance is the annual average energy consumption by existing appliances of the 
same appliance type, as defined by the particular make and model of the appliance. Appliances 
replaced as part of the project may be excluded. National appliance data may be used due to 
the uniformity of appliances available in the market. Data may be further differentiated (i.e., by 
income class) as appropriate data are available.  
The performance benchmark for Category C, x, must be calculated as follows: 
For data following a normal distribution:  
The performance benchmark is based on the standard deviation of the sample.  
𝑥= ܽ−0.84ߪ  
(3) 
Where:  
x 
= 
Performance benchmark 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
17 
a 
= 
Average performance 
σ 
= 
Standard deviation (sigma) of the annual energy consumption of existing 
appliances in operation 
For data not following a normal distribution:  
The performance benchmark is equal to the 80th percentile value within the numerically 
ordered sample. To calculate the 80th percentile the sample data point values (v1, v2…vN) must 
be ordered from largest to smallest (descending order). The 80th percentile value is equal to 
the value of the data point with the rank at which 80% of the data fall below.  
To be additional, dwellings must satisfy the following condition: 
ܽ௥௖,௞≤𝑥 
(4) 
Where:  
x 
= 
Performance benchmark 
arc,k 
= 
Annual energy consumption per appliance of the replacement appliance, type k 
Figure 3 shows how the performance benchmark (vertical red line to the left) is calculated by 
determining the average performance (vertical solid blue line), defined as the annual average 
energy consumption by existing appliances of the same appliance type and subtracting 0.84σ. 
The standard deviation (σ) is calculated from the existing appliance data obtained from the 
population. The numbers along the horizontal axis represent the number of standard deviations 
from the average value (average performance). The shaded red section represents replacement 
appliances with an annual energy consumption values that fall below the performance 
benchmark, and are considered additional.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
18 
Figure 3. Performance benchmark for Category C 
 
The parameters to be monitored for calculating the average performance and standard 
deviation for Category C are listed in Section 9. 
Category D. Replacement of a mobile home: No performance benchmark is defined. 
7.4 
Performance Benchmark Level 
The level of the performance benchmark established using the performance method is based 
on the rigorous requirement that with 80% confidence, dwellings deemed additional under the 
methodology would not have reached the improvement in energy efficiency on their own. This is 
evidenced by performance data of dwellings from the same building stock as defined in the 
methodology. The methodology formulates a universally applicable approach. The actual value 
of the performance benchmark (i.e., the 80th percentile of percentage improvement in energy 
efficiency over the three most recent years) then has to be calculated for the specific project 
area where the methodology is applied. Hence, the same rigor applies wherever the 
methodology is used. Example case data from the US shows that only a tiny fraction of houses 
have undergone weatherization in recent years and that on average, energy use is still on the 
rise, making substantial energy efficiency improvements not a likely occurrence on their own.  
7.5 
Distribution of Performance in the Sector 
There is an abundance of data showing that energy use in existing US buildings is inefficient 
and increasing over time, and that there are significant barriers to increased penetration of 
energy efficiency measures. Studies show that the trends in energy use and efficiency are 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
19 
largely similar across the world, although there are some programs (e.g., the United Kingdom 
Green Deal under the Energy Act of 2011) which target economy-wide energy efficiency 
program implementation on a large scale.  
It is important to note that the level of the performance benchmark is dictated by the 
performance in a particular geographic area as defined by the same building stock. Therefore, 
even though there may be programs in different geographic areas that promote residential 
energy efficiency measures, projects in those locations would still need to exceed the locally 
applicable performance benchmark.  
By extension, in geographic locations where programs exist to promote energy efficiency 
measures, the performance benchmark can be expected to represent a level of savings that is 
more stringent than in locations where no such programs exist. The performance method is 
designed to ensure that the level of the performance benchmark automatically becomes more 
stringent in geographic locations with increasing levels of residential energy efficiency 
activities.  
See examples of relevant data for establishing the building stock in Appendix 1. 
7.6 
Evaluation of the Tradeoff between False Negatives and False 
Positives 
The level of the performance benchmark was determined after careful consideration of the 
tradeoff between false negatives and false positives. 
False negatives, in the context of the methodology, are dwellings that have been excluded by 
the performance method (found not to be additional) even though the efficiency upgrades to 
these dwellings would not have occurred in the absence of the project. False positives are 
dwellings that are included in the project even though their efficiency upgrades would have 
happened anyway. The latter can be considered free-riders. 
In elaborating the performance method, the team originally intended to develop a performance 
benchmark value for efficiency that dwellings would have to attain in order to be considered 
additional, in the form kWh/m2 or a comparable metric. This metric however was shown to 
create a risk of producing an unacceptable number of false negatives. During stakeholder 
consultations, Joel Eisenberg, Weatherization Evaluation Consultant for the US Department of 
Energy acting as Program Manager at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, pointed out that 
weatherization efforts directed at low income houses typically target the most energy inefficient 
houses. While the impact of weatherization is large, both in terms of energy savings compared 
to the baseline and in social impact, these dwellings are unlikely to meet a high energy 
efficiency standard even after weatherization. To avoid unnecessary and inappropriate 
disqualification of low income dwellings, the decision was made to elaborate the performance 
method based on a percentage change rather than an absolute performance level. 
In setting the performance benchmark, the 80th percentile was deemed a sufficiently rigorous 
requirement for exclusion of free riders. If the performance benchmark were to be established 
using a higher level (e.g., 90%), there would be a significant risk that the level of energy 
efficiency enhancement to be exceeded by dwellings in the project would be determined by 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
20 
singular and random occurrences rather than a systematic trend in the population. For 
instance, there are households which undertake energy efficiency improvements based on 
personal environmental consciousness, or because residents are particularly handy and can do 
the work themselves, or because houses are so drafty that air sealing is necessary to improve 
living comfort. Special cases with high energy efficiency gains should not be considered the 
norm. To consider these the norm would lead to the perverse result of disqualifying many 
weatherization projects.  
In choosing a benchmark value of 80% does not allow for rare occurrences to set the 
performance benchmark, and by focusing on percentage changes in efficiency enhancements 
rather than absolute levels of efficiency, VM0008 seeks to minimize and optimally balance the 
tradeoff between false positives and false negatives. 
7.7 
Geographic Scope 
When using a performance benchmark for Category A, Category B, or Category C activities, 
project proponents must calculate the performance benchmark for each same building stock 
identified in the project description. While the methodology does not set out a geographic 
limitation on project location, this requirement restricts each performance benchmark to a 
specific geographic area defined in a project description (e.g., a state, province or region). 
7.8 
Data Selection and Use 
In developing a performance benchmark, project proponents must select and use data sources 
that meet the following requirements: 
1) Data collected directly from primary sources must comply with relevant and appropriate 
standards, where available, for data collection and analysis, and be audited at an 
appropriate frequency by an appropriately qualified, independent organization.  
2) Data collected from secondary sources must be available from a recognized, credible 
source and must be reviewed for publication by an appropriately qualified, independent 
organization or appropriate peer review group, or be published by a government agency.  
3) Where sampling is applied in data collection, the project proponent must demonstrate 
that sampling results provide an unbiased and reliable estimate of the true mean value 
(i.e., the sampling does not systematically underestimate or overestimate the true 
mean value). Project proponents may choose to demonstrate the appropriateness of 
sampling results based on a qualitative description of data sources and methods, 
where appropriate. 
4) Data must be publicly available, where appropriate (not confidential). Proprietary data 
(e.g., data pertaining to individual facilities) may be aggregated, and therefore not 
made individually publicly available, as there are demonstrable confidentiality 
considerations. However, sufficient data must be publicly available to provide 
transparency and credibility to the dataset.  
5) All data must be made available, under appropriate confidentiality agreements as 
necessary, to Verra and each of the validation/verification bodies assessing the 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
21 
proposed performance benchmark, to allow them to reproduce the determination of the 
performance benchmark. Data must be presented in a manner that enables them to 
independently assess the presented data.  
6) All reasonable efforts must be undertaken to collect sufficient data and the use of 
expert judgment as a substitute for data must only be permitted where it can be 
demonstrated that there is a paucity of data. Expert judgment may be applied in 
interpreting data. Where expert judgment is used, good practice methods for eliciting 
expert judgment must be used (e.g., IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National GHG 
Inventories).  
7) Where data must be maintained in a central repository on an on-going basis (e.g., in a 
database that holds sector data for use by project proponents in establishing specific 
performance benchmarks for their projects), there must be clear and robust custody 
arrangements for the data and defined roles and responsibilities with respect to the 
central repository.  
7.9 
Data Maintenance 
Project proponents must maintain data used to establish any performance benchmark in a 
manner that meets the following requirements: 
The dataset may be documented in the project description or in a separate repository that is 
referenced by the project description. Datasets documented and contained within the project 
description are static datasets, where all project activities use the level of the relevant 
performance benchmark that is specified in the project description.  
The following applies with respect to datasets maintained in a separate repository: 
1) The dataset may be static or dynamic (i.e., may or may not be periodically updated). 
2) The project description must establish criteria and procedures for the use of the 
dataset and for establishing a specific performance benchmark for each same building 
stock.  
3) The project description may specify that projects use the level of the performance 
benchmark metric available at project validation for the duration of their project 
crediting periods, or may specify that projects use an updated level of the performance 
benchmark at each verification event. The frequency that data is updated within the 
dataset must be determined by the project proponent.  
4) It must be demonstrated that procedures are in place to maintain the dataset in 
accordance with the applicable requirements set out in Section 7.8. 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
22