3 DEFINITIONS 
Biogenic CO2  
CO2 emissions deriving from the respiration of organic matter by bacteria (biological processes) or 
its oxidation through physico-chemical processes (e.g., combustion or pyrolysis). Fast-cycling 
biogenic CO2 emissions are considered climate-neutral.3  
Eventual discards 
Food discarded later in the supply chain after implementation of a project designed to prevent its 
discard  
Food  
All parts of plants, fungi, and animals —whether processed, semi-processed, or raw— that could 
be eventually consumed by humans4  
Food loss and waste (FLW)  
Food (and any associated inedible parts) that goes to any FLW destination5  
Food loss and waste (FLW) destination  
Where food goes when removed from the human food supply chain (see Appendix 1: FLW 
Destinations) 
 
1 It is useful to note that in situations where the FLW received by a facility is being valorized (e.g., soil amendment is 
created, energy is recovered), the expected GHG emission reductions for projects diverting this FLW are likely small. 
2 For other purposes (e.g., general communication about GHG emissions associated with food loss and waste), 
organizations may use Connecting Food Loss and Waste to Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Guidance for Companies (FLW 
Protocol, 2021). 
3 Biogenic CO2 emissions originating from long-term carbon (C) stocks like soil C pools or forests add to the CO2 
concentration in the atmosphere and are considered relevant to climate change. 
4 The definition of “food” used in this methodology is broader than that in the FLW Standard, which differentiates “food” 
(i.e., edible parts intended for human consumption in a particular context) from its associated “inedible parts.” The 
definition of “food” includes drinks.  
5 The abbreviation FLW is used in this document as shorthand for “food loss and waste” as defined in this methodology. 
This definition does not match definitions used in other programs for food loss or food waste, such as for the UN SDG 12.3 
target (i.e., which excludes animal feed and bio-based materials/biochemical processing destinations; see Champions 
12.3’s Guidance on Interpreting Sustainable Development Goal 12.3).  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
6 
 
Food loss and waste (FLW) flows 
The mass of food that without adoption of the project activity would go to an FLW destination. 
Note that this is equivalent to the mass of food that is eventually recovered by project activities. 
Food loss and waste (FLW) source 
Where food loss and waste is generated  
Inedible parts6  
Components associated with a food that, in a particular food supply chain, are not intended to be 
consumed by humans. Examples of inedible parts associated with food may include bones, rinds, 
and pits/stones.7 
Recovered food 
Food that has been kept in the human food chain because of the project activity; includes 
activities that focus on “prevention” (preventing food from being discarded in the first place) as 
well as “rescue” (redistributing to people food at risk of being discarded).