3 DEFINITIONS 
Composite baseline 
A group of constituent baseline plots representing the baseline scenario, located outside of the 
project area. A composite baseline is paired to each sample unit used to monitor the project 
scenario and is updated over time to establish a dynamic performance benchmark for 
additionality and crediting baselines. Each composite baseline is derived as the optimally 
weighted k-nearest neighbor combination of plots that matches the initial conditions of its 
paired project sample unit.  
Constituent baseline plot 
An individual sample plot representing the baseline scenario, located outside of the project 
area, that constitutes a component of one or more composite baselines 
Donor pool 
A population of potential sample plots located outside of the project area, from which 
constituent baseline plots are sourced. The donor pool is a representatively sampled, 
continuously measured national or sub-national forest inventory.  
Project sample unit 
A permanent forest inventory plot (either fixed area or variable radius plot) used as the primary 
sample unit selected for measuring and monitoring carbon stock change and emissions in the 
project scenario. “Plot” and “sample unit” are used interchangeably within this methodology. A 
sample unit may constitute a collection of plots (e.g., a cluster), provided that the collection of 
plots is sampled from within a single stand. Sample units are paired with a composite baseline. 
Stand1 
A contiguous, defined area composed of trees sufficiently uniform in age-class distribution, 
composition, and structure and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality to be a 
distinguishable unit. Relevant in accounting as the primary building block (i.e., a minimum 
mapping unit of variable size) for quantifying project area and identifying areas subject to 
harvest or disturbance. 
 
1 Definition adapted from Helms, J. A. ed. 1998. Dictionary of Forestry. Society of American Foresters.  
 
 
 
 
VM0045, v1.2 
7