50  
CO  
mg/Nm3  
100  
100  
 
 
14 Reproduced in full from the 2002 UNEP Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP) Report of the Task Force 
on Destruction Technologies. Available at: http://ozone.unep.org/teap/Reports/Other_Task_Force/TEAP02V3b.pdf. This 
screening process must also be applied for HFC destruction. 
15 All concentrations of pollutants in stack gases and stack gas flow rates are expressed on the basis of dry gas at normal 
conditions of 0 ºC and 101.3 kPa, and with the stack gas corrected to 11% O2.  
VM0016, v2.0 
77 
A3.1 Destruction and Removal Efficiency  
Destruction efficiency (DE)16 is a measure of how completely a particular technology destroys a 
contaminant of interest – in this case the transformation of ODS material into non-ODS by-products. 
There are two commonly used but different ways of measuring the extent of destruction – DE and 
destruction and removal efficiency (DRE).17 For a more detailed explanation of how DRE is calculated, 
see Section 4.2.1 [of the TEAP Report of the Task Force on Destruction Technologies]. The terms are 
sometimes interchanged or used inappropriately. DE is a more comprehensive measure of destruction 
than DRE, because DE considers the amount of the chemical of interest that escapes destruction by 
being removed from the process in the stack gases and in all other residue streams. Most references 
citing performance of ODS destruction processes only provide data for stack emissions and thus, 
generally, data is only available for DRE and not DE.  
Because of the relatively volatile nature of ODS and because, with the exception of foams, they are 
generally introduced as relatively clean fluids, one would not expect a very significant difference 
between DRE and DE. For these reasons this update of ODS destruction technologies uses DRE as the 
measure of destruction efficiency. For the purposes of screening destruction technologies, the 
minimum acceptable DRE is:  
• 
95% for foams. 
• 
99.99% for concentrated sources.  
It should be noted that measurements of the by-products of destruction of CFCs, HCFCs, and halons in 
a plasma destruction process have indicated that interconversion of ODS can occur during the process. 
For example, under some conditions, the DRE of CFC-12 (CCl2F2) was measured as 99.9998%, but this 
was accompanied by a conversion of 25% of the input CFC-12 to CFC-13 (CClF3), which has the same 
ozone-depleting potential. The interconversion is less severe when hydrogen is present in the process, 
but can nonetheless be significant.18 For this reason, it is important to take into account all types of 
ODS in the stack gas in defining the DRE.  
For the reasons described in the previous paragraph, the Task Force recommends that future 
calculations of DRE use the approach described below.19 
 
16 Determined by subtracting from the mass of a chemical fed into a destruction system during a specific period of time 
the mass of that chemical that is released in stack gases, fly ash, scrubber water, bottom ash, and any other system 
residues and expressing that difference as a percentage of the mass of the chemical fed into the system.  
17 Traditionally determined by subtracting from the mass of a chemical fed into a destruction system during a specific 
period of time the mass of that chemical alone that is released in stack gases, and expressing that difference as a 
percentage of the mass of that chemical fed into the system.  
18 Deam, R. T., A. R. Dayal, T. McAllister, et al. 1995. “Interconversion of chlorofluorocarbons in plasmas.” Journal of the 
Chemical Society 3: 347–8. https://doi.org/10.1039/C39950000347. Murphy, A. B., A. J. D. Farmer, E. C. Horrigan, and T. 
McAllister. 2002. “Plasma destruction of ozone depleting substances.” Plasma Chemistry and Plasma Processing 22: 371–
85. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015365032020  
19 Since different ODS have different ODP, consideration should be given to taking into account the ODP of each type of 
ODS present in the stack gas in calculating the DRE. An appropriate definition that takes into account the differences in 
ODP is: “DRE of an ODS is determined by subtracting from the number of moles of the ODS fed into a destruction system 
during a specific period of time, the total number of moles of all types of ODS that are released in stack gases, weighted 
 
VM0016, v2.0 
78 
DRE of an ODS should be determined by subtracting from the number of moles of the ODS fed into a 
destruction system during a specific period of time, the total number of moles of all types of ODS that 
are released in stack gases and expressing that difference as a percentage of the number of moles of 
the ODS fed into the system.  
In mathematical terms, 𝐷𝑅𝐸= 
𝑁𝐼
𝑖𝑛− ∑𝑁𝑖
𝑜𝑢𝑡 
 
𝑖
 
𝑁𝐼
𝑖𝑛
   where 𝑁𝐼
𝑖𝑛 is the number of moles of the ODS fed into the 
destruction system and 𝑁𝑖
𝑜𝑢𝑡 is the number of moles of the ith type of ODS that is released in the stack 
gases.  
A3.2 Emissions of Dioxins and Furans 
Any high temperature process used to destroy ODS has associated with it the potential formation (as 
byproducts) of polychlorinated dibenzo-paradioxins (PCDDs) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans 
(PCDFs). These substances are among the products of incomplete combustion (or PICs) of greatest 
concern for potential adverse effects on public health and the environment. The internationally 
recognized measure of the toxicity of these compounds is the toxic equivalency factor (ITEQ),20 which is 
a weighted measure of the toxicity for all the members of the families of these toxic compounds that 
are determined to be present.  
The task force members note that the World Health Organization has developed a new system for 
calculating TEQs, however, most of the existing data on emissions is expressed in the former ITEQ 
system established in 1988.  
For purposes of screening destruction technologies, the maximum concentration of dioxins and furans 
in the stack gas from destruction technologies is:  
• 
0.5 ng-ITEQ/Nm3 for foams.  
• 
0.2 ng-ITEQ/Nm3 for concentrated sources.  
These criteria were determined to represent a reasonable compromise between more stringent 
standards already in place in some industrialized countries [for example, the Canada-Wide Standard of 
0.08 ng/m3 (ITEQ)], and the situation in developing countries where standards may be less stringent or 
 
by their ODP relative to that of the feed ODS, and expressing that difference as a percentage of the number of moles of 
the ODS fed into the system.”  
20 There are 75 chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and 135 chlorinated dibenzofurans that share a similar chemical structure 
but that have a wide range in degree of chlorination and a corresponding wide range in toxicity. Of these, one specific 
dioxin [2,3,7,8- Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or (TCDD)] is the most toxic and best characterized of this family of 
compounds. Since PCDDs and PCDFs are generally released to the environment as mixtures of these compounds, the 
scientific community has developed a system of toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) which relate the biological potency of 
compounds in the dioxin/furan family to the reference TCDD compound. The concentration of each specific compound is 
multiplied by its corresponding TEF value, and the resulting potency-weighted concentration values are summed to form 
an expression of the mixture’s overall toxic equivalence (TEQ). The result of this exercise is a standardized expression of 
toxicity of a given mixture in terms of an equivalent amount of TCDD (the reference compound). The internationally 
accepted protocol for determining TEQ (i.e., ITEQ) was established by NATO in 1988). [Scientific Basis for the Development 
of International Toxicity Equivalency Factor (I-TEF), Method of Risk Assessment for Risk Assessment of Complex Mixtures 
of Dioxins and Related Compounds. North Atlantic Treaty Organization/Committee on the Challenge of Modern Society. 
Report No. 176, Washington, D.C. 1988.]  
VM0016, v2.0 
79 
non-existent. Although a previous standard of 1.0 ng/m3 (ITEQ) had been suggested in the UNEP 1992 
report, advances in technology in recent years, and the level of concern for emissions of these highly 
toxic substances, justified a significantly more stringent level.  
A3.3 Emissions of Acid Gases, Particulate Matter, and Carbon Monoxide  
Acid gases are generally formed when ODS are destroyed and these must be removed from the stack 
gases before the gases are released to the atmosphere. The following criteria for acid gases have been 
set for purposes of screening destruction technologies:  
• 
A maximum concentration in stack gases of 100 mg/Nm3 HCl/Cl2 
• 
A maximum concentration in stack gases of 5 mg/Nm3 HF 
• 
A maximum concentration in stack gases of 5 mg/Nm3 HBr/Br2 
Particulate matter is generally emitted in the stack gases of incinerators for a variety of reasons and 
can also be emitted in the stack gases of facilities using non-incineration technologies. For the 
purposes of screening technologies, the criterion for particulate matter is established as:  
• 
A maximum concentration of total suspended particulate (TSP) of 50 mg/Nm3  
Carbon monoxide (CO) is generally released from incinerators resulting from incomplete combustion 
and may be released from some ODS destruction facilities because it is one form by which the carbon 
content of the ODS can exit the process. Carbon monoxide is a good measure of how well the 
destruction process is being controlled. For the purposes of screening technologies, the following 
criterion has been established:  
• 
A maximum CO concentration in the stack gas of 100 mg/Nm3 
These maximum concentrations apply to both foams and concentrated sources. They were set to be 
achievable by a variety of available technologies while ensuring adequate protection of human health 
and the environment.  
A3.4 Technical Capability  
As well as meeting the above performance requirements it is necessary that the destruction 
technologies have been demonstrated to be technically capable at an appropriate scale of operation. In 
practical terms, this means that the technology should be demonstrated to achieve the required DRE 
while satisfying the emissions criteria established above. Demonstration of destruction of ODS is 
preferred but not necessarily required. Destruction of halogenated compounds that are refractory (i.e., 
resistant to destruction), is acceptable. For example, demonstrated destruction of polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs) was often accepted as an adequate surrogate for demonstrated ODS destruction.  
For this evaluation, an ODS destruction technology is considered technically capable if it meets the 
following minimum criteria:  
VM0016, v2.0 
80 
• 
It has been demonstrated to have destroyed ODS to the technical performance standards, 
on at least a pilot scale or demonstration scale (designated in Table 2-2 as “Yes”).  
• 
It has been demonstrated to have destroyed a refractory chlorinated organic compound 
other than an ODS, to the technical performance standards, on at least a pilot scale or 
demonstration scale (designated in Table 2-2 as “P,” which indicates that the technology is 
considered to have a high potential for application with ODS, but has not actually been 
demonstrated with ODS).  
• 
The processing capacity of an acceptable pilot plant or demonstration plant must be no 
less than 1.0 kg/hr of the substance to be destroyed, whether ODS or a suitable surrogate.  
These criteria of technical capability will minimize the risk associated with technical performance and 
ensure that destruction of ODS will be performed in a predictable manner consistent with protecting 
the environment.  
 
APPENDIX 4: JUSTIFICATION OF 
COMPATIBILITY WITH TRANSITION TO NET 
ZERO 
Project activities focused on the destruction of ODS or HFCs directly support the net-zero transition by 
permanently destroying GHGs with high GWP, therefore preventing future emissions. Since such project 
activities target legacy and stockpiled substances, they do not lead to the implementation of 
technologies or assets or result in behavioral dependencies that could lock in carbon-intensive 
pathways. On the contrary, the methodology supports transitioning to environmentally friendly 
alternatives, complementing the phase-out and phase-down of substances controlled under the 
Montreal Protocol. 
 
 
 
 
 
VM0016, v2.0 
81 
APPENDIX 5: UNCERTAINTY ASSESSMENT 
The uncertainty assessment of the methodology was based on the different scenarios of the 
substances, sources and products and the parameters involved in the quantification.  
The main parameter identified as a key value is the quantity of substances being destroyed. This 
requires monitoring the weight, composition and concentration. 
For concentrated sources (refrigerants, extracted blowing agents, fire suppressants and propellants), 
the mass of the substance sent for destruction is determined by individually measuring the weight of 
each container. Weighing instruments must comply with relevant national requirements and/or 
international standards and must be regularly calibrated. The precision is expected to be very high 
(~0.5% error) and not contributing significantly to the overall uncertainty. 
Composition and concentration must also be established for each individual container by taking a 
sample and analyzing its composition and concentration at an accredited laboratory (in compliance 
with the applicable ISO, AHRI 700-2006 or equivalent standards). The laboratory analyzing the 
composition must not be affiliated with the project proponent or the project activity beyond performing 
these services to ensure objectivity. 
Moisture content and high boiling residue must be subtracted from the total mass to quantify the 
amount of ODS or HFC eligible for destruction crediting. 
For the case where the baseline scenario is recovery of the substance, the methodology assumes an 
annual leak rate but limits the crediting to the amount that would have been leaked for 10 years, even 
if leaks would have occurred beyond that.  
The overall uncertainty is expected to be below 3% and reduced further as different sources and 
substances are aggregated given individual uncertainties are partially compensated. 
For dilute sources (intact foam sent for destruction), the mass of the foam must be determined at the 
destruction facility on a calibrated scale and presence of any contaminants and non-foam material 
must be deducted. The precision is expected to be in the range of 5% error and not contributing 
significantly to the overall uncertainty. 
Identification and composition of the foam blowing agents present in the appliance insulation foam 
must be determined based on at least one sample per appliance by an accredited independent 
laboratory. 
The most relevant parameter identified is related to the quantity of blowing agent contained in the 
foam that would have been released in the baseline. This value is conservatively determined based on 
the above sampling of the foam pieces and applying a deduction factor to account for the uncertainty 
in the removal practice in the baseline. 
Also, another deduction is included in the methodology to account for the baseline disposal practice 
and the potential decay and decomposition of the foam blowing agent by bacteria under anaerobic 
conditions. The uncertainty is therefore addressed by applying a conservative factor. 
 
Uncertainty in project emissions is mainly caused by transportation and addressed through a 
conservative emission factor included in the methodology. Given the small proportion of this emission 
source to the overall emissions, this source of uncertainty is not contributing significantly to the result. 
Emissions associated to energy consumption are expected to be precise since electricity and fuel 
consumption is generally well monitored and precise given the natural financial incentive in the 
underlaying commercial transaction. Emissions associated to the destruction of the substances are 
also conservative under the assumption of the lowest destruction efficiency. 
Leakage is also included in the calculation and assumed to be caused by a substitute substance. Given 
the broad range of substitute candidates, a high global warming potential substance among several 
options was assumed to be conservative. 
VM0016, v2.0 
82 
As a conclusion, the most relevant uncertainty of the methodology is associated to the baseline 
emissions, which propagated to the overall uncertainty of the emission reductions using the variance 
method is expected to be around 5%. Therefore, no additional deduction is required. 
 
 
VM0016, v2.0