4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology covers weatherization of dwellings and implementation of energy efficiency 
measures in single-family homes, multi-family buildings, or mobile homes that reduce energy 
consumption. Examples include but are not limited to, improved air sealing, enhanced 
insulation, replacements of refrigerators or air conditioning units, and upgrades to 
heating/cooling systems, such as heat pumps (HP) and heat pump water heaters (HPWH). 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
1) The project activity consists of the weatherization of dwellings and/or implementation 
of energy efficiency measures in single-family homes, multi-family buildings, or mobile 
homes to reduce energy consumption. Project activities may include weatherizing 
whole buildings, replacing mobile homes, or implementing individual energy efficiency 
measures within existing dwellings. 
2) The condition of the dwelling is and remains adequate for project activities according to 
nationally recognized weatherization best practice standards.5 Project activities do not 
result in a violation of health and safety, environmental, or other relevant regulations.  
3) The replacement appliances and mobile homes replaces functioning appliances, or 
occupied homes.  
4) The dwelling is occupied. Vacancy is permitted on an intermittent basis for up to three 
months, or if the dwelling is occupied seasonally on an annual basis.  
5) The capacity of any replacement appliance or replacement component of a central 
heating/cooling system satisfies the post-retrofit heat load, cooling load and electricity 
demand (“energy load”) within the dwelling.  
6) In the case of heating/cooling systems that serve multiple dwellings, all residential 
dwellings connected to the system is included in the project.  
7) The dwelling meets or exceeds the performance benchmark as calculated for the same 
building stock.  
 
5 For example, in the United States, the Department of Energy Weatherization Assistance Program and the Building 
Performance Institute provide training curricula, core competencies, and example best practice standards for 
Weatherization activities, which are available at: http://www.waptac.org/sp.asp?mc=training_resources and 
http://www.bpi.org/standards.aspx.  
 
VM0008, v1.2 
8 
Applicable interventions fall into one of the following categories: 
Category A. All energy retrofit: A combination of energy efficiency measures directed at the 
building envelope (i.e., air infiltration, insulation), improving the efficiency of the central heating 
and/or cooling system and reducing energy consumption of appliances (i.e., replacement of 
refrigerators, air conditioning units, lamps, showerheads). 
Category B. Efficiency enhancement of the building envelope and central heating and/or 
cooling system only. 
Category C. Replacement of appliances currently in service.  
Category D. Replacement of a mobile home currently occupied.  
Fuel switching is allowed as part of the interventions only if it does not include switching from a 
higher carbon intensity fossil fuel to a lower carbon intensity fossil fuel (e.g., switching from coal 
briquettes to natural gas is not in scope). Switching from a fossil fuel to electricity is allowed.  
In the case of “replacement” of a mobile home, the word “retrofit” must be read to mean 
replacement throughout the methodology.  
The methodology is applicable in any geographic region, provided appropriate data exist to 
establish the level of the performance benchmark for the same building stock of a project’s 
geographic region.  
When sampling, the minimum number of dwellings or appliances to be sampled must be the 
square root of the total number of dwellings i, or appliances included in the project. Statistically 
sound sampling approaches must be used. When the control group approach (Section 8.3) is 
utilized, the size of the control group must be the square root of the total number of dwellings 
in the project, but it does not need to exceed 100 dwellings. In any sampling approach, the 
following conditions must be met:  
1) The sample is statistically valid and uses one of the following methods: 
a) Simple random sample  
b) Systematic sampling 
c) Stratified sampling within the same building stock 
d) Cluster sampling 
2) The sample is representative of the population. 
3) The data are from an approved source (i.e., a certified energy auditor) or a nationally 
recognized data source.  
4) Actions that may bias the sample is avoided. Sampling includes dwellings that are 
dispersed geographically. Sampling is conducted for each defined building stock 
included in the project activity. Criteria include region, dwelling type, and income level.  
When conducting modelling for heat pump / heat pump water heater (HP/HPWH) as appliances 
(e.g., in Category C), tools such as EnergyPlus, Home Energy Rating System (HERS), utility-grade 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
9 
deemed savings models,6 utility-grade monitored savings model,7  or geothermal heat pump 
OEM models (e.g., Wright Suite) and other industry specific models must be used for 
establishing HP/HPWH baseline and project energy consumption values and must meet the 
following:  
a) The model includes weather-normalized adjustments spanning at least a 10-year basis, 
drawing upon the Typical Meteorological Year (TMY) data8 at the project location’s 
county level when establishing the modelled baseline emissions and, to ensure system 
performance is calibrated each project year y, the modelling must draw upon local, 
applicable weather data for project year y when calibrating the modelled project 
emissions each year; and that the model includes performance curves which take into 
account the coefficient of performance of HP/HPWH in different climate zones 9 
b) The modelling system meets ASHRAE standard requirements;10  
c) When modelling is conducted for appliances separately from other potential whole 
house improvements (in Category C and D), any other post retrofit building design 
inputs must be applied to the baseline heat/cooling mechanical systems modelling in 
order to conservatively exclude other building improvements’ energy savings (e.g., from 
fenestration, insulation etc) from the appliance-only modelling results. 
Additional requirements apply when HP/HPWH installations involve geothermal systems and/or 
are implemented by utilities/OEMs: 
• 
Each site must have at least one geothermal installer who is certified or trained by the 
OEM supplying the geothermal equipment. 
• 
If OEMs or utilities pursue HP/HPWH installations under Category C, they must deduct 
any VCUs already issued in their region to other project proponents to prevent double-
counting.  
 
6 Such utility-grade deemed savings models include examples such as the RTF “any any” models used by northwestern 
utilities to establish deemed savings for HP/HPWHs where the specific building where the HP/HPWH are installed are not 
known 
7 NYSERDA, for example, applies such modeling systems where the specific locations of the HP/HPWH installations are 
known through the incentive program information. 
8 https://nsrdb.nrel.gov/data-sets/tm 
9  Default "performance curves" for any HVAC equipment  including HP and HPWH are developed by DOE and 
associated national labs. Each piece of equipment that has a cooling or heating coil (residential heat pumps, chillers, 
boilers, etc.) has a set of performance curves that dictate the coil's energy consumption and efficiency at different 
temperatures, flow rates, load conditions, etc. The output of each of these curves is used to determine the energy 
consumption of the HVAC system for each hour of the year. The inputs for these curves can be seen in the Energy Plus 
Input/Output Reference Guide Section 1.57 - Group- Performance Curves (pg 2460: Input Output Reference). The 
performance curve coefficients and COP are customized to match the existing equipment and new equipment.  
10 ASHRAE Guideline 14 when calibrating and energy model using historical energy bills 
ANSI/BPI-1200-S-2017 
ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301-2022 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
10 
o 
OEMs must also include utilities in their list of other project proponents in the 
same region with issued VCUs 
o 
This hierarchy is applied because OEMs and utilities typically apply regional 
“any-any” utility-grade modeling rather than models tailored to the specific 
buildings where HP/HPWH are known to have been installed by other project 
proponents in the same region (e.g., real estate developers, energy efficiency 
service companies, HP installers)