7 ADDITIONALITY 
This methodology uses a project method for the demonstration of additionality. 
Step 1: Regulatory surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements set out in the most recent versions of the VCS Standard and VCS Methodology 
Requirements. The following additional guidance must be considered: 
All national or regional policies and regulations relevant to HFC must be assessed, including 
those that: 
a) place a fixed limit on a cumulative basis for total HFC emissions within a given year’s 
operations. 
b) transfer ownership of all resulting HFC reductions to other entities to meet their 
separate compliance obligations (e.g., such as would arise in upstream cap/trade 
requirements). 
c) stipulate the installation of leak detection systems as the only option to fulfill retail 
operations’ compliance purposes. 
d) may impact otherwise the compliance of the practice without an automatic leak 
detection system. 
Where the project activity demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to Step 2 (investment 
analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.  
 
VM0001, v1.2 
 
8 
Step 2: Investment analysis 
The project proponent must apply an investment comparison analysis (option 1) of the most 
recent version of VT0008 Additionality Assessment.  
For the baseline scenario, ongoing refrigerant costs must be included as cash flows. For the 
project scenario, cash flows must include the investment cost of the leak detection system, 
ongoing refrigerant costs, and any other relevant expenses or revenues associated with the 
implementation, operation, and maintenance of the leak detection system. 
Where the investment comparison analysis (including sensitivity analysis) shows that the project 
activity would not be the economically most attractive scenario in the absence of carbon credit 
revenues, proceed to Step 3 (common practice analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not 
additional. 
Step 3: Common practice 
The project proponent must apply the common practice analysis following the most recent 
version of VT0008 Additionality Assessment. 
Where the proposed project activity is not considered common practice, and Step 1 (regulatory 
surplus) and Step 2 (investment analysis) are met, the project activity is additional. 
Where the proposed project activity is considered common practice, the project activity is not 
additional.