1  
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Performance Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Performance Method 
This methodology is applicable to projects which implement reduced impact logging practices to 
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (hereafter termed RIL-C practices) in one or more of 
three GHG emission source categories (ie, timber felling, skidding and hauling). RIL-C practices 
may entail a range of improved logging and harvest planning practices, including, but not limited 
to, directional felling, improved log bucking (to permit greater recovery), improved harvest 
planning via pre-harvest inventory, skid trail planning and/or monocable winching, and reduction 
in width of haul roads and size of log landings. 
  
The effectiveness of RIL-C practices, and accounting of emission reductions attributable to those 
practices, is assessed on the basis of their impacts post-harvest. Emission reductions are 
accounted for by applying a performance method approach, whereby emission reductions (net of 
baseline and project emissions) are assigned as a function of the difference between a set 
crediting baseline for each emission source category (ie, felling, skidding and hauling) and the 
measured impact of those parameters in the project scenario.  
 
To ensure credible estimation of emission reductions, the impact parameters applied by this 
methodology are quantitative and outcome-based, rather than process-based (which are typically 
limited to demonstrating that the practice is in place, but may provide no information on how 
successful the implementation of the practice is). Further, emission reductions are estimated as a 
continuous function of the impact parameter values with which they correspond, providing better 
resolution of outcomes than a flat default factor. This methodology has been designed to ensure 
that emission reductions achieved based on one impact parameter are not reversed by excessive 
emissions with respect to another impact parameter, by requiring that all impact parameters must 
be at or below the crediting baseline in order for credits to be generated based on any one impact 
parameter. 
 
Accounting is further simplified by incorporating the assumption that leakage equals zero and the 
wood products pool can be excluded because the methodology requires that there is no reduction 
in harvest levels.  
 
Accounting is focused on emissions at the time of harvest from operations including felling, 
skidding and hauling, and delayed emissions from belowground biomass. Any net sequestration 
from comparatively improved growth post-RIL-C harvest is conservatively ignored.  
 
VM0035, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
5 
 
Accounting of emission reductions begins on the project start date and is determined on all 
harvests through the project crediting period.  
 
This document provides the framework for the methodology, and serves to outline core 
accounting procedures. Key parameters such as additionality benchmarks, crediting baselines, 
impact parameters, emission reduction equations and monitoring procedures are provided in 
corresponding geographic-specific RIL-C performance method modules. This methodology must 
be used in conjunction with a region-specific performance method module. The list of approved 
performance method modules applicable to this methodology can be found on the VCS website.