6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
The crediting baseline uses a dynamic performance benchmark approach, where the baseline 
scenario is represented by designated composite baselines (made up of forest measurement 
plots located outside of the project area) that are continually monitored. These are paired with 
sample units representing the project scenario.  
A group of constituent baseline plots sourced from a donor pool of national or sub-national 
forest inventory plots is collectively matched to project sample units and designated as a 
“composite baseline.” Matching is achieved using a k-nearest neighbor optimal matching 
approach, deriving weights for constituent baseline plots to produce a weighted combination 
(composite baseline) that conforms to the initial conditions of the paired project sample unit. 
Matching conditions are defined by referencing one or more covariates representing biophysical 
and anthropogenic factors driving carbon stock change.  
 
 
 
 
VM0045, v1.2 
11 
Initial conditions of composite baselines and project sample units must be matched at t = 0 
(prior to initiation of the project activity). The selection and weighting of constituent baseline 
plots must be subsequently held constant throughout the project crediting period (with rare 
exceptions, see Section 8.1).  
A two-stage sample is recommended for the project scenario, with primary units (e.g., stands) 
selected via probability proportional to size (acreage) and secondary units (e.g., plots) selected 
via simple random sampling (SRS) or systematic sampling with a fixed sample size within each 
selected primary unit (which is self-weighting and simplifies calculations). In this case, a 
composite baseline is matched to each primary unit on the basis of initial covariate values 
averaged across the secondary units. 
Constituent baseline plots may be sourced from new or existing continuously measured 
national or sub-national forest inventories and must meet the following requirements: 
1) Sample plots must be located outside of the project area.  
2) Sample plot populations from which constituent baseline plots are sourced must be 
from unbiased, representative sampling at a regional scale. 
3) Sample plots must be subject to continuous, periodic re-measurement throughout the 
project crediting period. Constituent baseline plots need not be on the same re-
measurement schedule but must be re-measured every 10 years or more frequently. 
4) Initial conditions must be quantified from measurements collected at time t − 10 or 
more recently.   
5) Sample plots must be located in the same ecoregion (e.g., referencing ecological 
sections from Cleland et al. (2007)6 in the US or Holdridge life zones7 elsewhere). 
6) Trees on sample plots must be given unique identification numbers to permit tracking 
of individual stems. 
7) Measurement parameters (e.g., minimum diameter at breast height) must be paired 
with the project sample units. 
Project proponents must use approved data sources, matching covariates, and procedures for 
the national or sub-national jurisdiction in which they occur, as specified in the methodology 
appendices (e.g., Appendix 1). Where not specified in the current version of the methodology, 
approved data sources, matching covariates, and procedures for other national or sub-national 
jurisdictions may be developed through revisions to the methodology. 
 
 
6 Cleland, D. T., J. A. Freeouf, J. E. Keys, G. J. Nowacki, C. A. Carpenter, and W. H. McNab. 2007. Ecological Subregions: 
Sections and Subsections for the Conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D. USDA Forest Service. 
https://doi.org/10.2737/WO-GTR-76D  
7 Leemans, R. 1992. Global Holdridge Life Zone Classifications. IIASA. https://resources.unep-
wcmc.org/products/31d5e80482834f6ba6ee51a2813b82e7  
 
 
 
 
VM0045, v1.2 
12