4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology is globally applicable to project activities that capture CO2, which would 
have otherwise been emitted to or remained in the atmosphere, and utilize it as a feedstock 
in the production of concrete.  
 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions:  
1) Project activities manufacture ready-mix or pre-cast concrete products using CO2 as 
a feedstock, a process that requires lower amounts of cement than concrete 
production processes that do not use CO2 as a feedstock. 
2) The concrete products produced by the project activity have equivalent or better 
performance (e.g., compressive strength and code compliance) as the baseline 
concrete products that would have otherwise been produced and used in the 
absence of the project.   
3) Project activities produce a concrete material that will be used and sold in the 
commercial market. 
4) The use of supplementary cementitious materials (SCM) in cement and concrete is 
eligible either in the baseline or project scenario. 
5) Where project activities produce pre-cast products, the products replace pre-cast 
products made in the traditional form (without CO2 as feedstock and higher cement 
content) and do not replace other products made of different materials. 
CO2 from direct air capture (DAC) is an acceptable source of CO2 for this project 
activity.    
6) If CO2 is captured from an emissions source that is regulated by a cap-and-trade or 
emission trading system (ETS) program, the project proponent must review the 
facility’s emissions reporting to regulators to ensure it is not reducing its emissions 
output based on the amount of CO2 captured and supplied to the project activity. 
Alternatively, the project proponent can receive an attestation from the facility that it 
is not reporting lower emissions due to the capture of CO2 for the project activity. If 
such reporting is not available or an attestation cannot be provided, the project 
activity must not count emissions reductions for the sequestering of CO2 into 
concrete (although emission reductions can still be counted for the reduction in 
cement usage). 
 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
7 
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
1) Recycled concrete use in both the baseline or project scenario.