2 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE 
METHODOLOGY 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Performance Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Performance Method 
 
This methodology provides a framework for the quantification of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emission reductions associated with the production and installation of Foam Stabilized 
Base (FSB) and/or asphalt emulsions as substitutes for Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) in road 
construction projects located in the United States.1 
For over 40 years, FSB and asphalt emulsions have been used in road projects around the 
world when natural resources for virgin aggregate or funding to construct and maintain 
roads using HMA have been limited. In North America, where virgin aggregate has historically 
been easily accessible within proximity to project sites, FSB has not been as widely 
implemented as it has in other parts of the world. FSB has, therefore, been used on a very 
limited basis in the United States for the last 10 to 15 years. Most projects using FSB and 
asphalt emulsions in the United States are pilot projects funded by various state highway 
agencies. While these projects have proven successful, state highway administrations have 
been slow to accept and develop the protocol and practices for this approach in North 
America. Presently there are no national or regional standards for the production or 
application of FSB and asphalt emulsions, which serves as a major impediment to the 
acceptance and application of FSB and asphalt emulsions beyond the testing phase. 
GHG emission reductions are generated from producing and applying FSB and asphalt 
emulsions versus HMA as follows: 
 
 
1 Under this methodology, the project proponent may be the technology owner, FSB producer/manufacturer, road 
owner, contractor, or other party associated with the production of application/construction or development of 
paving segments paved with FSB. Given that the project proponent could be any one of entities listed above, clear 
project ownership must be demonstrated through contractual agreements, or other arrangements, in order to avoid 
the risk of double counting with other participants in the supply chain. 
 VM0039, v1.1 
 
5 
 
• 
FSB and asphalt emulsions consist of 50% less liquid asphalt/bitumen by weight 
and 2.5% less asphalt/bitumen by volume than required for HMA production, 
reducing the reliance on resources. No virgin aggregates are required, eliminating 
the energy and resources needed for excavating machines and trucking. In most 
applications, but especially in rural areas, the GHG emissions from trucking are 
significantly reduced. This is due to the fact that FSB and asphalt emulsions can be 
manufactured on or close to the project site. 
• 
Aggregates in FSB and asphalt emulsions do not have to be heated, while HMA 
liquid, which is roughly 2.2% of the total weight of the mix, needs to be heated up to 
310 ºF. 
In this methodology, performance benchmarks have been established for the determination 
of additionality and the crediting baseline. These benchmarks are based on GHG emissions 
from the baseline scenario, which enables a measurement of emission reduction potentials 
through the substitution of FSB and asphalt emulsions for HMA. Data from hot mix facilities 
and placement projects in different geographic locations within the United States were 
surveyed to determine the levels of the performance benchmarks. Emission reductions of 
FSB and asphalt emulsions are the differences between actual project emissions and the 
crediting performance benchmark.