6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
The baseline scenario including the GHG sources must be defined according to the 
technologies, practices, fuel types, and fuel consumption patterns that will be replaced by the 
project devices in the defined target population.  
6.1 
Selection and Justification of the Baseline Scenario 
Step 1: Identify alternative baseline scenarios 
Define the alternative baseline scenarios according to the cookstove unit type, the type of 
thermal energy service provided, the fuel type and source, and describe the GHG sources 
involved.  
The alternative baseline scenarios must include both existing and alternative cookstove 
technologies that provide comparable outputs for cooking to the users of the target population. 
The project activity without being registered as a project activity under a GHG program must be 
included as an alternative. 
Where the project activity replaces a mix of technologies, services, and/or fuel types, the 
baseline alternative must be defined in a conservative way considering these variables. Where 
multiple fuels are used in the baseline, the proportion of baseline fuel usage may be 
established in terms of energy supplied by each of the identified fuels. 
The baseline alternatives must be defined using the results of a baseline survey of the target 
population and cross-checked with relevant and current information from credible literature 
from the specific project region, official publications (e.g., surveys, studies), or official statistics 
from government entities or other credible agencies. The baseline survey of the target 
population must apply the procedures and practices described in Section 6.2. 
Step 2: Consider existing and forthcoming government policies and legal requirements 
Eliminate the baseline alternatives that are inconsistent with existing and forthcoming 
mandatory legal or regulatory requirements. These may include minimum product efficiency 
standards and air quality requirements.  
Where the legal or regulatory requirements are systematically not enforced and non-compliance 
is widespread in the applicable geographic region, include the alternative scenarios in the list 
for further consideration. Demonstration of non-enforcement must be based on authoritative 
and up-to-date information that is relevant and applicable to the alternative scenario. 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
13 
Where the mandatory legal or regulatory requirements are enforced, eliminate the alternative 
scenario from further consideration. 
Step 3: Assess financial, institutional, and information barriers 
Establish a complete list of realistic and credible barriers that may prevent alternative 
scenarios from occurring. The barriers must be based on the actual context of the project 
activity and alternatives and the applicable geographic area, reflecting practical challenges to 
activity implementation. The applicable geographic region is: 
a) the entire host country (default); or 
b) defined as per the most recent version of VT0008 Additionality Tool. 
Eliminate the baseline alternatives that face financial, institutional, or information barriers. 
These barriers are further explained in Step 2a of VT0008. 
The remaining baseline scenario(s) must be one, or a combination, of the following: 
i) 
Non-renewable biomass: The baseline scenario is the target population’s continued use 
of inefficient cookstoves fired with non-renewable firewood or charcoal to meet similar 
thermal energy outputs for cooking as the project devices. Project proponents may use 
a combination of different non-renewable biomass types in the baseline. 
ii) Fossil fuels: The baseline scenario is the target population’s continued use of 
cookstoves fueled by solid or liquid fossil fuels (e.g., coal, kerosene) to meet similar 
thermal energy outputs for cooking as the project devices.  
Cookstoves that have a fuel other than non-renewable biomass or solid or liquid fossil fuels 
(e.g., electricity, solar thermal, renewable biomass, LPG) in the baseline scenario must be 
excluded from the project activity. 
6.2 
Baseline Scenario Survey Requirements 
The objective of the baseline survey is to collect critical information related to existing baseline 
technologies, services, fuel types, and fuel sources in the target population. The survey must be 
designed, carried out, and analyzed in line with the most recent version of the CDM Standard 
for Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. 
The survey results must define the following for each target population: 
1) Baseline fuel type(s) and the percentage of their use by the target population; 
2) Source(s) of each baseline fuel (i.e., collected, purchased, or procured through other 
means); 
3) Baseline technologies for cooking and the percentage of their use by the target 
population; and 
4) Average household size (Hhi). 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
14 
The survey results must be validated against relevant and current information from credible 
literature, official publications (e.g., independent surveys, studies), or official statistics from 
government entities or other credible agencies.  
Where survey results for any of the above criteria (i.e., baseline fuel types, fuel sources, cooking 
technologies, or average household size) deviate significantly from official statistics or credible 
literature and may lead to a non-conservative baseline, project proponents must: 
1) provide additional justification and rationale to explain the deviation, including specific 
evidence demonstrating why the official literature or statistics are not representative of 
the target population; or 
2) use the values from the literature, official publications, or official statistics for the target 
population. 
The initial baseline survey must be performed prior to validation. The project proponent may 
employ local third-party agencies to carry out the baseline survey. Follow-up baseline surveys 
must be conducted every two years in control households that do not participate in the project. 
These control households must be established prior to validation and must be shown to be 
statistically equivalent to the pre-project conditions of project households regarding baseline 
fuel type(s) and percentage of use by the target population, source(s) of each baseline fuel, and 
baseline technologies for cooking. For existing projects updating to VM0050, control 
households must be established before the first verification under VM0050. 
A binding questionnaire is presented in Appendix 3. The project proponent may adopt a 
different format but must include these questions as a minimum. 
Survey and data collection methods: The baseline survey performed prior to validation and prior 
to crediting period renewal must be conducted as physical on-site visits (face-to-face), whereas 
follow-up baseline surveys during the crediting period may be conducted either as physical on-
site visits (face-to-face) or through remote surveys via phone call or virtual meeting.  
Timing: The baseline survey must be scheduled to avoid major festivals, holidays, and similar 
events that could impact the outcomes. It must be scheduled in a way that ensures that the 
results are conservative, given seasonal variability. 
Sample size calculations: The surveys must be conducted for each target population. Where 
project devices are distributed within regions or target populations with heterogenous 
conditions (e.g., regional variations in fuel types or cooking practices), the target population 
must be divided into clusters/groups with homogeneous conditions. 
The minimum sample size must be determined with respect to use of baseline fuel types and 
baseline technologies, and household size. 
The following key factors must be considered when determining the minimum sample size: 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
15 
a) Calculations may be completed manually or with appropriate statistical software. 
b) The confidence level and precision must be at least 90/10. 
c) The target value must be identified (i.e., the expected value of the parameter). 
Where a survey covers two or more project activity instances, and the population is 
homogeneous, simple random sampling must be used. Where the population consists of 
varying sub-populations (i.e., is not homogenous), stratified random sampling must be used. 
Survey reporting: The data collection method and the protocol for producing the final dataset 
and results must be documented in the project description and monitoring reports.