2 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE 
METHODOLOGY 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Activity method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project method 
 
Wetland restoration occurs sporadically throughout the world primarily to create wildlife habitat, 
restore water quality and quantity levels and provide storm protection and food production. 
However, wetland restoration also provides the additional benefits of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emission reductions and climate change mitigation.  
This methodology outlines procedures to estimate net greenhouse gas emission reductions and 
removals resulting from project activities implemented to restore tidal wetlands. Such activities 
may include creating, restoring, and/or managing hydrological conditions, sediment supply, 
salinity characteristics, water quality and/or native plant communities. Accordingly, this 
methodology is applicable to a wide range of project activities aimed at restoring and creating 
tidal wetlands, and emission reductions and removals are estimated primarily based on the 
ecological changes that occur as a result of such activities (e.g., increased vegetative cover, 
changes to water table depth). 
This methodology also addresses the potential for the establishment of woody vegetation. As 
such, this methodology is categorized as a Restoring Wetland Ecosystems (RWE) and 
Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation (ARR) methodology. 
Project activities are expected to generate GHG emission reductions and removals through: 
• 
Increased biomass 
• 
Increased autochthonous soil organic carbon 
• 
Reduced methane and/or nitrous oxide emissions due to increased salinity or changing 
land use 
• 
Reduced carbon dioxide emissions due to avoided soil carbon loss 
This methodology is applicable to projects located globally, and to all tidal wetland systems (i.e., 
tidal forests (such as mangroves), tidal marshes and seagrass meadows). For the additionality 
assessment, an activity method is used. A project method is used with respect to the crediting 
baseline for all projects. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
6 
For strata with organic soil, this methodology sets out procedures for the estimation of peat 
depletion time (PDT). Likewise, for strata with mineral soils and sediments, this methodology 
provides procedures for the estimation of soil organic carbon depletion time (SDT). This 
methodology also includes an assessment of the maximum quantity of GHG emission 
reductions which may be claimed from the soil organic carbon (SOC) pool (either based on the 
difference between the remaining soil organic carbon stock in the project and baseline 
scenarios after 100 years (total stock approach), or the difference in cumulative carbon loss in 
both scenarios since the project start date (stock loss approach)).  
To estimate carbon stock changes in tree and shrub biomass, this methodology uses 
procedures from CDM tool AR-Tool14 Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks 
of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM project activities. This methodology also provides a method to 
account for carbon stock changes in herbaceous vegetation. 
Since biomass may be lost due to subsidence following sea level rise, restoration projects 
involving afforestation or reforestation may account for long-term carbon storage in wood 
products where trees are harvested before dieback. 
GHG emissions from the SOC pool are estimated by assessing emissions of CO2, CH4 and N2O, 
which may be estimated via several methods (e.g., proxies, modeling, default factors, local 
published values). Where allochthonous SOC accumulates in the project scenario, a procedure 
is provided to deduct such carbon from net emission reductions. 
Proxies for emissions from the SOC pool may include water table depth and soil subsidence (for 
which procedures from other methodologies and modules are used) and carbon stock change. 
For non-seagrass tidal wetland systems, a default factor may be used in the absence of local 
data. 
CH4 and N2O emissions in the baseline scenario may be conservatively set to zero. Where the 
project proponent demonstrates that CH4 or N2O emissions do not increase in the project 
scenario compared to the baseline scenario, these emissions need not be accounted for. 
This methodology also addresses anthropogenic peat fires occurring in drained areas and 
establishes a conservative default value (Fire Reduction Premium) based on fire occurrence 
and extension in the project area in the baseline scenario. The procedure is based on VCS 
module VMD0046 Methods for monitoring soil carbon stock changes and GHG emissions in 
WRC project activities. The approach avoids the direct assessment of GHG emissions from fire 
in the baseline and project scenarios.  
This methodology also includes procedures to account for GHG emissions from prescribed 
burning (using literature-based emission factors for non-CO2 GHGs) and fossil fuel use (by 
incorporating procedures from the CDM tool AR-Tool05 Estimation of GHG emissions related to 
fossil fuel combustion in A/R CDM project activities). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
7 
This methodology includes procedures for the consideration of sea level rise with respect to 
determining the geographic boundaries of the project area, and the determination of the 
baseline scenario and baseline emissions. 
Activity-shifting leakage and market leakage are deemed not to occur if the applicability 
conditions of this methodology are met. Furthermore, activity-shifting leakage and market 
leakage are deemed not to occur if the pre-project land use will continue during the project 
crediting period. 
Under the applicability conditions of this methodology, ecological leakage does not occur by 
ensuring that the effect of hydrological connectivity with adjacent areas is insignificant (i.e., no 
alteration of mean annual water table depths will occur in such areas). In tidal wetland 
restoration projects, de-watering downstream wetlands is not expected. 
This methodology provides the steps necessary for estimating the project’s net GHG benefits, 
as represented by the equation below: 
NERRWE = GHGBSL – GHGWPS + FRP – GHGLK 
 
 
 
 
 
Where: 
NERRWE   
= Net CO2e emission reductions from the RWE project activity 
GHGBSL   
= Net CO2e emissions in the baseline scenario 
GHGWPS   
= Net CO2e emissions in the project scenario 
FRP 
  
= Fire Reduction Premium (net CO2e emission reductions from organic soil  
 
  
combustion due to rewetting and fire management) 
GHGLK 
 
 
= Net CO2e emissions due to leakage