8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
Baseline emissions are determined using the annual average leak rate from refrigerants of 
each retail store during the baseline period. This includes refrigerant emitted during operations, 
repair and maintenance of the equipment within the project boundary.  
The baseline period for store equipment consists of at least three years prior to the installation 
of the leak detection equipment for that store equipment. 
Where such historical data records prior to the installation of the leak detection equipment are 
unavailable, subsequent consecutive years must be included.  
If refills are less frequent than three years, the baseline period must be adjusted to cover at 
least one full refill cycle. 
 
VM0001, v1.2 
 
9 
The project proponent must demonstrate that the selected baseline period is conservative. 
The data inputs are based on those the company uses for HFC refrigerant reporting compliance 
purposes under the Kigali amendment of the Montreal Protocol. Therefore, baseline data must 
be based on such corporate records for the relevant project locations. Data must include the 
equipment’s refrigerant charges and refills/replacements/leaks/use data (based on leak 
records and/or purchase records for replacement refrigerant as reflected in the compliance 
systems) according to the steps described below. 
Since this is a retrofit project and the number of stores with leak detection systems may 
increase over time, the historical baseline must be recalculated each year y to account for new 
stores added or stores removed. The historical baseline is based on all store equipment with 
leak detection systems installed by year y. This ensures that the historical baseline is taken 
from the same set of systems against which the new total leak detection systems have been 
retrofitted and against which the leak rates for year y will be estimated. Thus, baseline 
emissions are given by a baseline leak rate BLRy for each year y. 
The baseline leak rates are estimated using the following procedures and equations. 
The historical baseline is calculated as a three-year average based on HFC refrigerants. 
Calculations use totals for leaks and charges across all the refrigeration systems in stores 
where leak detection systems have been installed and HFCs are in use by year y. 
𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑦= 1
3 × ∑
(∑ 𝐿𝑥,𝑠
𝑠
/ ∑ 𝐶𝑥,𝑠
𝑠
)
𝑥=𝑋
𝑥=1
 
(1) 
Where:  
BLRy 
= Baseline leak rate from all store equipment with leak detection systems installed 
and HFCs in use by year y (%) 
Lx,s 
= Total leaks from refrigerants in baseline year x from store equipment s that has 
leak detection systems installed and HFCs in use by year y (kg) 
Cx,s 
= Total charge for refrigerants in baseline year x from store equipment s that has 
leak detection systems installed and HFCs in use by year y (kg) 
s 
= Store equipment included in the project activity 
x 
= Baseline year for each store equipment s, including at least three consecutive 
years x.  
The total leaks and charge volumes are estimated from the database systems used for HFC 
management. These systems measure the refrigerants used to refill the equipment each time a 
leak occurs, reflecting the amount of refrigerant leaked. Each system entry describes the 
amount of refrigerant injected into the equipment at the time of a leak, thus providing data 
inputs that, summed over a year, give totals for Lx,s. These same data systems also document 
the refrigerant charges for each piece of store equipment. Summing the refrigerant charges for 
each piece of relevant equipment in the store s gives the total for Cx,s. 
 
VM0001, v1.2 
 
10 
Lx,s includes adjustments for seasonal top-offs and draw-downs where practiced in the store 
equipment. These are seasonal increases and decreases in refrigerant charge levels to adjust 
for seasonal temperature changes in the environment. Top-offs are considered a leak (thus an 
addition to Lx,s), while draw-downs are considered the opposite and thus a deduction to Lx,s 
where recovered and not vented. 
Where three years historical leak rate information prior to leak detection system installation is 
not available, a more conservative alternative historical baseline may be created by including 
emission rates from subsequent consecutive years. 
For instance, if only two years historical data is available in a store, the baseline period (x1, x2, 
x3) for that store will include two years before project implementation and one year after 
implementation. 
If only one-year historical data is available, the baseline period for that store will be one year 
before and one year after, for the first project year; and one year before and two years after, for 
the second project year. 
Baseline Cap 
A baseline leak rate cap (CAP BLRy) must be applied using the data from the GreenChill Program 
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as per Table 2. 
Table 2: Baseline leak rate cap (CAP BLRy)  
EPA Green Chill share 
CAP BLRy (%) 
If Green Chill members’ share of 
industry is less than 50% 
Highest leak rate from among their members’ averages 
If Green Chill members’ share of 
industry is more than 50% 
Leak rate achieved by the supermarket member which, on a 
ranked basis from highest performing to lowest performing (that is 
lowest leak rate to highest leak rate) represents the 50th percentile 
of retail stores (see example below) 
Example: 
Supermarket “i” 
(anonymous)  
LRi  
Avg. leak rate for 
supermarket i  
ICi  
% Industry capacity  
Sumi = 0 through i (ICi)  
Cumulative Capacity  
Supermarket A 
7% 
3% 
3%  
Supermarket B 
9% 
15% 
18%  
Supermarket C 
11% 
4% 
22%  
Supermarket D 
13% 
12% 
34%  
Supermarket E 
15% 
8% 
42%  
Supermarket F 
17% 
10% 
52%  
Supermarket G 
19% 
5% 
57%  
Supermarket H 
21% 
3% 
60%  
 
 
 
VM0001, v1.2 
 
11 
Additionally, a second cap of 25%, based on the EPA’s estimate for the U.S. industry average 
leak rate, is applied. 
Final Baseline Selection 
The final baseline leak rate (Final BLRy) is determined per Equation 2: 
𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑦= 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑦, 𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑦, 25%) 
(2) 
 
Where:  
Final BLRy 
= 
Final baseline leak rate in year y (%) 
BLRy 
= 
Baseline leak rate from all store equipment with leak detection systems 
installed and HFCs in use by year y (%) 
CAP BLRy 
= 
Baseline leak rate cap for Green Chill members as outlined in Table 2 (%) 
25% 
= 
EPA’s estimate for the U.S. industry average leak rate 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
Project emissions are determined using the average leak rate in year y arising from the total 
refrigerants emitted during operations, repair or maintenance of the equipment within the 
project boundary. 
The project emissions from HFCs are estimated using the following approach and equations. 
𝑃𝐿𝑅𝑦 = ∑ 𝐿𝑦,𝑠
𝑠
/ ∑ 𝐶𝑦,𝑠
𝑠
  
(3) 
Where: 
PLRy 
= Project leak rate from stores equipment that has leak detection systems installed 
and HFCs in use by year y (%) 
Ly,s 
= Total leaks from refrigerants in year y from store equipment s that has leak 
detection systems installed and HFCs in use by year y (kg) 
Cy,s 
= Total charge for refrigerants in year y from store equipment s that has leak 
detection systems installed and HFCs in use by year y (kg) 
 
Note – Ly,s includes adjustments for top-offs and draw-downs where practiced in the store 
equipment. 
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
There is no requirement for the project to consider leakage as it is not likely to occur for the 
following reasons: 
 
VM0001, v1.2 
 
12 
• 
Any refrigerant savings achieved in the store location due to lower leak rates will result in 
smaller refrigerant purchases. Thus, any upstream leaks during manufacture or 
transportation of the refrigerant (which are estimated to be a relatively low percentage of 
total supply chain leaks from refrigerant use) will also be reduced. Such “positive 
leakage” is conservatively set at zero. 
• 
Any top-off or draw-down changes in refrigerant use for the relevant period are already 
captured under Ly,s and Lx,s. 
• 
The leak detection systems do not control, influence or impact the release of refrigerants 
when equipment is decommissioned. 
• 
This methodology does not apply to used leak detection equipment sourced from 
outside the project boundary, since in this case emissions may increase in the external 
location while emissions reductions are counted within the project. Leak detection 
equipment already installed in DX equipment within the project boundary may be 
removed (e.g., where DX equipment is being decommissioned) and used again (e.g., 
where new DX equipment is purchased) since these changes all take place within the 
project boundary. 
8.4 
Net Reductions and Removals 
Emission reductions are calculated as follows:  
𝐿𝑅𝑅𝑦= 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑦−𝑃𝐿𝑅𝑦  
(4) 
Where: 
LRRy 
= Leak rate reduction for project in year y (%) 
Final BLRy = Final baseline leak rate in year y (%) 
PLRy 
= Project leak rate from stores equipment that has leak detection systems installed 
and HFCs in use by year y (%)  
 
𝐸𝑅𝑦= 𝐿𝑅𝑅𝑦× ∑ 𝐶𝑦,𝑠
𝑠
× 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐻𝐹𝐶,𝑦
1000
 
(5) 
Where: 
ERy 
= Emissions reductions in year y (t CO2e) 
LRRy 
= Leak rate reduction for project in year y (%) 
Cy,s 
= Total charge for refrigerants in year y from store equipment s that has leak 
detection systems installed and HFCs in use by year y (kg) 
GWPHFC,y 
= Weighted average global warming potential of HFCs installed/used in year y 
(t CO2e/t HFC) 
 
VM0001, v1.2 
 
13 
The weighted average global warming potential GWPHFC,y is calculated by the following equation: 
𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐻𝐹𝐶,𝑦= 
∑(𝐿𝑇,𝑦 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑇)
𝑇
∑𝐿𝑇,𝑦
 
(6) 
Where: 
LT,y 
= Total leaks from refrigerant substance type T in year y from all store equipment 
that has leak detection systems installed and HFCs in use (kg) 
GWPT 
= Global warming potential of refrigerant substance* type T installed/used in year y 
(t CO2e/t HFCT) 
Where HFC/HFOs blends are used, the GWP of HFO is zero as illustrated in Table 3. 
Table 3: Example of GWPHFC,y calculation 
 
LT,y 
GWPT 
LT,y × GWPT 
HFC 1 
100 
600 
60 000 
HFC 2 
50 
3 000 
150 000 
HFC 3 
40 
1 000 
40 000 
HFO 1* 
10 
0