1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION  
Table 1. Additionality, crediting baseline, and mitigation outcome 
Additionality, Crediting Method, and Mitigation Outcome 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
Mitigation Outcome 
Reductions 
 
This agricultural land management (ALM) methodology provides procedures to estimate the 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions (CH4, N2O, and CO2) resulting from the adoption of 
improved management practices in rice production systems.  
The methodology is compatible with sustainable agriculture and has a particular focus on 
reducing methane (CH4) emissions from the cultivation of rice. Practices that are expected to 
result in material declines in soil organic carbon (SOC) are not eligible under this methodology. 
Projects that seek credits for SOC stock increases (removals) or that employ practices that 
result in material declines in SOC must use VCS methodology VM0042 Improved Agricultural 
Land Management.  
The crediting baseline and additionality are determined via a project method (Table 1). The 
baseline scenario assumes the continuation of pre-project rice cultivation practices. The 
management practices in the baseline scenario are determined by applying a historical look-
back period to produce an annual schedule of activities (i.e., irrigation and water regime, 
planting date and type, fertilization practices, drainage event(s), harvest dates, and off-season 
practices) for each quantification unit (e.g., for each field) within the project area, over the 
project crediting period.1  
Each project must include activities that materially reduce soil methanogenesis (reducing CH4 
emissions) and may optionally include further practices, including avoided biomass burning 
(reducing CH4 and N2O emissions), application of biochar, use of methanotrophs, improved 
nitrogen fertilizer management (i.e., reductions in total nitrogen usage and/or the use of 
interventions such as nitrification inhibitors), and more efficient fossil fuel usage (reducing CO2 
 
1 At crediting period renewal, the validity of the original baseline scenario must be reassessed. Where the original 
baseline is determined to be invalid, a new baseline scenario reflecting current rice production practices in the region 
must be developed. For more details, see the most recent rules on baseline reassessment and project crediting renewal 
in Sections 3.2.7 and 3.9.8 of the VCS Standard, v4.7 or equivalent sections of the most recent version. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
6
emissions). Any quantitative adjustment in optional practices must exceed 5% of the pre-
existing value to qualify as a practice change. 
Additionality is demonstrated by a regulatory surplus assessment, barrier and/or investment 
analysis, and a common practice test to determine that the practice change implemented 
under the project activity is not common practice.  
Reductions are quantified using one of three eligible quantification approaches (QAs), including 
QA1: using a biogeochemical, process-based model; QA2: direct measurements of CH4 
emissions; and QA3: default equations and emission factors. Available options differ depending 
on the GHG pool or source being assessed and the scale of the project. Simplified procedures 
are provided for projects using Quantification Approach 3 that have a capacity limit of 60 000 
t CO2e per year. See Table 4 for a summary of allowable quantification options and Section 8.1 
for the details of each approach.