10 REFERENCES 
Avery, T. E., and H. E. Burkhart. 2015. Forest Measurements. Waveland Press. 
Bird, D. N., N. Pena, H. Schwaiger, and G. Zanchi. 2010. Review of Existing Methods for Carbon 
Accounting. CIFOR Occasional Paper (54). 
Cline, M. G. 1944. “Principles of soil sampling.” Soil Science 58 (4): 275–88. 
Cochran, W. G. 1977. Sampling Techniques. John Wiley & Sons. 
Ducey, M. J., M. S. Williams, J. H. Gove, S. Roberge, and R. S. Kenning. 2013. “Distance-limited 
perpendicular distance sampling for coarse woody debris: Theory and field results.” Forestry 86 
(1): 119–28. https://doi.org/10.1093/forestry/cps059 
Ferraro, P. J., and M. M. Hanauer. 2014. “Advances in measuring the environmental and social 
impacts of environmental programs.” Annual Review of Environment and Resources 39: 495–
517. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-101813-013230 
Harmon, M. E., C. W. Woodall, B. Fasth, J. Sexton, and M. Yatkov. 2011. Differences Between 
Standing and Downed Dead Tree Wood Density Reduction Factors: A Comparison Across Decay 
Classes and Tree Species. Research Paper NRS-15. US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
Holdridge, L. R. 1967. Life Zone Ecology. Tropical Science Center. Data available at: 
http://iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu/SOURCES/.ECOSYSTEMS/.Holdridge/present+.life-
zone/downloadsGeoTiff.html 
IPCC. 2003. Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry. Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). https://www.ipcc.ch/publication/good-practice-guidance-
for-land-use-land-use-change-and-forestry/ 
IPCC. 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Institute for Global 
Environmental Strategies (IGES). 
IPCC. 2019. Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Volume 4. IPCC. https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/index.html 
Kershaw Jr, J. A., M. J. Ducey, T. W. Beers, and B. Husch. 2016. Forest Mensuration. John Wiley & 
Sons. 
Mathur, A., A. P. Chikkatur, and A. D. Sagar. 2007. “Past as prologue: An innovation-diffusion 
approach to additionality.” Climate Policy 7 (3): 230–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2007.9685651 
Nelson, D. W., and L. E. Sommers. 1996. “Total carbon, organic carbon, and organic matter.” In 
Methods of Soil Analysis. Part 3 Chemical Methods, edited by A. L. Page, P. A. Helmke, R. H. 
Loeppert, et al. American Society of Agronomy and Soil Science Society of America. (pp. 961–
1010).  
 
VM0047, v1.1 
65 
Olson, D. M., E. Dinerstein, E. D. Wikramanayake, et al. 2001. “Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: 
A new map of life on earth. A new global map of terrestrial ecoregions provides an innovative tool 
for conserving biodiversity.” BioScience 51 (11): 933–8. https://doi.org/10.1641/0006-
3568(2001)051[0933:TEOTWA]2.0.CO;2 
Petersen, R. G., and L. D. Calvin. 1986. “Sampling.” In Methods of Soil Analysis: Part 1 Physical 
and Mineralogical Methods, edited by A. Klute. American Society of Agronomy and Soil Science 
Society of America. 
Schumacher, B. A. 2002. Methods for the Determination of Total Organic Carbon (TOC) in Soils 
and Sediments. US Environmental Protection Agency.  
Souza Jr, C. M., D. A. Roberts, and M. A. Cochrane. 2005. “Combining spectral and spatial 
information to map canopy damage from selective logging and forest fires.” Remote Sensing of 
Environment 98 (2–3): 329–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2005.07.013 
Van Wagner, C. E. 1968. “The line intersect method in forest fuel sampling.” Forest Science 14 
(1): 20–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/forestscience/14.1.20 
Warren, W. G., and P. F Olsen. 1964. “A line intersect technique for assessing logging waste.” 
Forest Science 10 (3): 267–76. https://doi.org/10.1093/forestscience/10.3.267 
Wendt, J. W., and S. Hauser. 2013. “An equivalent soil mass procedure for monitoring soil organic 
carbon in multiple soil layers.” European Journal of Soil Science 64 (1): 58–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ejss.12002 
Williams, M. S., and J. H. Gove. 2003. “Perpendicular distance sampling: An alternative method 
for sampling downed coarse woody debris.” Canadian Journal of Forest Research 33 (8): 1564–
79. https://doi.org/10.1139/x03-056 
Williams, M. S., H. T. Valentine, J. H. Gove, and M. J. Ducey. 2005. “Additional results for 
perpendicular distance sampling.” Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35 (4): 961–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1139/x05-023 
 
 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
66 
APPENDIX 1: PERFORMANCE METHOD 
A1.1 Applicability Conditions 
This appendix is applicable where all the following conditions are met: 
1) The project meets all applicability conditions detailed in Section 4 of this methodology. 
2) The project activities will produce vegetative cover allowing for clear spatial delineation of the 
project area.  
3) The project’s performance benchmark is updated at each verification or every five years, 
whichever comes first. 
A1.2 Baseline Scenario 
The baseline scenario is represented by the business-as-usual growth of carbon stocks in aboveground 
biomass, as observed on representative remotely sensed control plots located outside of any registered 
AFOLU project area. This approach creates the most plausible baseline scenario because remote 
sensing provides continual and quantifiable observations of changes in aboveground biomass allowing 
for the real-time comparison of project and baseline.  
The business-as-usual changes in vegetation cover are represented by the performance benchmark, 
which is equal to the ratio of average change in stocking index (SI) of control plots to project plots. The 
control plots are appropriately matched to the project plots based on similar biophysical, social, and 
political conditions, and historic stock trends (see Section A1.4). SI in control plots is detected using 
remote sensing and does not need direct field measurement. The baseline is established at every 
verification period through the application of an updated performance benchmark. The application of 
the performance benchmark, as explained below, effectively excludes crediting of project activities that 
may be expected to be implemented without carbon incentives, based on comparative outcomes. It also 
ensures that credited projects produce performance improvements relative to the business-as-usual 
case (represented by the crediting baseline). 
Note – All project and control plots referenced in this appendix are remotely sensed and will therefore be 
referred to as “project plots” and “control plots” from here onwards in Appendix 1. 
A1.3 Performance Benchmark 
The performance benchmark is determined by comparing the average rate of increase in the stocking 
index (SI) between project and control plots in Equation (A8). Equation (A7) demonstrates common 
practice additionality. A performance benchmark is developed for each project area, or in the case of 
grouped projects, a separate performance benchmark is developed for each annual cohort of 
instances. Performance benchmarks are monitored ex-post, hence are dynamic. The approach to select 
control plots outlined below constitutes a matching approach widely used in impact evaluation in the 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
67 
environmental field (Ferraro & Hanauer 2014). Matching approaches are not expected to produce exact 
matches for individual land parcels, but rather to produce robust estimates of impact for sample 
“populations” of matched pairs (controls and treatments).  
An ex-ante estimate of the performance benchmark must be calculated referencing a value of ΔSIcontrol,t 
using the stocking indices for the historic period t = −10 to t = 0 for the selected control plots (derived in 
Section A1.4). The project slope is derived from the growth and yield curve procedure provided in ex-ante 
calculations (see Section 8.7). 
Assessing plots using remote sensing does not involve direct estimation and reporting of carbon stocks. 
Remote sensing is used only to estimate relative stock change between control and project plots. 
Accounting of removals is treated in Section 8 and is dependent on direct field measurement. 
A1.4 Procedure to Define the Performance Benchmark 
The steps for establishing the performance benchmark must be documented in the project description 
in sufficient detail so that they can be repeated and validated. The location of all stocking index project 
and control plots must also be included in the project description. All of the following steps must be fully 
documented as part of the monitoring plan for project and control plots, as described in Section 9.3. 
Description of the Monitoring Plan.  
 
Step 1: Select Project Plots 
The following must be performed for each annual cohort separately.  
1) Divide the entire project annual cohort area into equal-sized, contiguous, non-overlapping units 
(project plots) with area ranging from 0.01 hectares (10 × 10 m) to 10 hectares. At least 75% of 
each unit must be within the project area boundary. Project plots may be represented by 
individual pixels or aggregates of pixels. 
2) Select a representative sample of n = 30 or more project plots across the project area using 
random sampling.  
Note – If the project is stratified or is a grouped project where new instances are added in subsequent 
years, individual strata may contain fewer than 30 plots, provided the total sample size is at least 30 and 
each stratum is used to establish a separate performance benchmark. 
 
Step 2: Select Control Plots for Each Project Plot 
1) Select donor pool area: 
Define donor pool area from within which control plots may be sourced, applying the criteria 
listed in Table A1. The process to determine the eligible control area is implemented with a 
series of GIS overlays. The project may include other spatially explicit, categorical drivers of 
carbon regeneration or reforestation (e.g., land cover classifications), provided their inclusion is 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
68 
justified on a theoretically sound or empirically demonstrated basis (e.g., peer-reviewed study). 
Any geospatial datasets included must have a resolution no coarser than 30 × 30 meters and 
must match or be finer than the resolution of the project plots used as units of analysis (see Step 
1(1) above). 
Table A1. Required factors and source data to delineate donor pool and pixel selection, 
evaluated for time t = 0. Time variant geospatial layers used must be current as of t = 0, ±5 years. 
Matching Criteria 
Description 
Jurisdictional 
boundary 
Where the project area is within a subnational jurisdiction either registered under 
Jurisdictional and Nested REDD+ (JNR) or delineated by the national or 
subnational government for reporting REDD+ (e.g., delineated as a discrete Forest 
Reference Emission Level), the relevant jurisdictional boundary is the subnational 
jurisdiction (no lower than the second administrative level from the national level). 
Otherwise, the jurisdictional boundary used is the national boundary.  
Source: the GIS layer for the jurisdictional boundary must be from a published or 
official national government source. 
Ecoregion 
The donor pool area must exclude any areas not within the same ecoregion 
(biome level) as the project. 
Policy environment 
The donor pool area must exclude any areas of the jurisdictional boundary 
(defined above) with presence/absence of any operating national or subnational 
government-funded policy/program providing incentives for tree planting that 
differs from that in the project area (e.g., USDA Conservation Reserve Program) 
Outside any 
registered AFOLU 
project 
Optionally, and as available, the donor pool area may exclude boundaries of any 
AFOLU projects registered under a carbon offset program. 
Source: kml files from project registries (e.g., Verra Registry) 
Land tenure 
All land tenure classifications present in the project area must be represented in 
the donor pool. 
Exclude any areas with different land tenure classification than the project area. 
Land tenure classification should be sourced from published or official 
government sources. 
At a minimum, land tenure classification must distinguish between public and 
private lands. More precise classifications (e.g., Indigenous reserves, concessions, 
private industrial lands) may be used where available. 
Source: published or official government source 
Distance from 
project plot 
Exclude areas beyond a 100 km radius of the centroid of the project plot. 
 
 
 
 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
69 
2) Evaluate project and control plots: 
Once the donor pool area has been delineated by applying the factors in Table A1, it is divided 
into non-overlapping units of equal size and not exceeding ±20% of the mean size of project 
plots.  
Quantify historic and initial conditions of SI via a time series analysis for a representative 
sample of control and project plots (Table A2). For each control plot, calculate a multivariate 
distance metric relative to each project plot, MD (e.g., Euclidean distance, Mahalanobis 
distance), across the vector of covariates. The vector of covariates must include stocking 
indices from at least three time points as described in Table A2.  
Table A2. Required covariates for matching control plots to project plots (detailed guidance on 
each covariate provided in Section A1.5) 
Matching covariate 
Description 
SIt=0, SIt=−10, etc.  
Covariates used for evaluating the multivariate distance between control and 
project plots must include stocking indices from three or more time points 
during the historic period. At minimum, stocking indices from each of the 
following periods must be selected: 
• 
Between t = −10 and t = −8 
• 
Between t = −8 and t = −1  
• 
At t = 0 
 
3) Match control and project plots: 
To match control plots with project plots, apply a k-nearest neighbor optimal matching approach 
without replacement (i.e., control plots may not be matched to multiple project sample plots). The 
number of control plots matched to each project plot (k) is selected by the project proponent. k 
must be kept constant for each match (e.g., if k=5 for project plot A, k must remain 5 for the 
project lifetime).  
Select the k control plots with the lowest multivariate distance metric values and derive relative 
weights, that sum to 1, proportional to the inverse of the multivariate distance metric value.  
Where: 
Wcontrol,i,j 
= Weight of control plot j matched to project plot i (value between 0 and 1; 
dimensionless) 
MDi,j 
= Multivariate distance of control plot j relative to project plot i 
(dimensionless) 
ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝=
݁−ெ஽೔,ೕ
∑
݁−ெ஽೔,ೕ
௡೔,ೕ
௝=1
 
 
(A1) 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
70 
ni,j 
= Number of control plots matched to project plot i (equal to k at project 
start date) 
Step 3: Evaluate Match Quality and Finalize Matching 
For the sample population of matched pairs (project plots and matched sets of control plots), evaluate 
match quality and finalize matching. 
For each included matching stocking index covariate, u, calculate the standardized difference of means 
(SDM) as follows: 
ܵܦܯ= |ݒ̅௪௣,u −ݒ௕௦௟,u| √(ߪ௪௣,௩
2
+ ߪ௕௦௟,௩
2
2
)
⁄
 
(A2) 
Where: 
SDM 
= Standardized difference of means 
ܸ௪௣,௨ 
= Mean value of covariate u in the population of project plots 
ܸ௕௦௟,௨ 
= Mean value of weighted sums of covariate u in the population of matched sets 
of control plots 
ߪ௪௣,௩
2
 
= Sample variance of covariate v in the population of project plots 
ߪ௕௦௟,௩
2
 
= Weighted sample variance of covariate v in the population of control plots 
Overall match results are deemed valid where SDM for each covariate is less than or equal to 0.25. 
Where the overall match is deemed valid, the final selection of control plots and their respective weights 
are then fixed, and Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates recorded, for the duration of the 
crediting period. Where the overall match is not deemed valid, Steps 1, 2, and 3 are repeated after:  
1) progressively expanding the radius of the donor pool in 100 km increments, and/or  
2) decreasing the k-value for all project plots, until a valid overall match is achieved. 
 
Step 4: Monitor Control and Project Plots 
The performance benchmark is derived from monitoring the stocking index (SI) in control and project 
plots.  
In each control and project plot, assess and record initial SI value. At each monitoring event, remove 
any control plots deemed invalid due to their location in areas no longer matching the project area in 
terms of being either: 
1) subject to any operating subnational government-funded program providing incentives for tree 
planting, implemented during the evaluation period, to which the project area is not subject; or 
2) within the boundaries of any AFOLU projects registered under a carbon offset program 
(optional). 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
71 
Where a control plot has been deemed invalid, the plot is excluded and replaced from the donor pool 
selected in Step 2. Weights of the control plots must be recalculated to sum to 1. For each remaining 
valid control and project plot, re-evaluate SI, consulting the most recent imagery (see SI parameter 
table for guidance on temporal constraints on imagery sourcing). 
Step 5. Derive and Evaluate Slopes for Time Series of Stocking Indices 
Assemble accumulated time series of ΔSIcontrol,t  and ΔSIwp,t values from time t = 0 to time t, estimated 
across the sample populations of project and control plots. The derivation of SI for the monitoring interval 
must include at minimum two, annual time steps: t and t = 0. Observations from all previous verifications 
must also be included. 
To be included in the dataset, SI values must be available at time t for project plot i, and all of its matched 
control plots i,j. Where SI values for plots within a matched set are not available at time t (e.g., due to 
cloud cover or temporary sensor issues), the matched set of project and control plots must not be used in 
the derivation of ΔSIcontrol,t and ΔSIwp,t at time t. A minimum of n = 30 project plots must be obtained for a 
representative sample of the area.  
The rate of increase in stocking index in the control (ΔSIcontrol,t) and project (ΔSIwp,t) plots is calculated in 
Equations (A5) and (A6) as the slope of the weighted least squares regression (WSLR) of the 
accumulated time series of SI values for the respective population of plots. 
Weights of SI values for control plots in the time series are calculated as follows: 
ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧= ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝× 
1
∑
݊_ݎݏ௧
௧
௧=0
  
(A3) 
 
Where: 
Wcontrol,i,j,t 
= Weight of control plot j matched to project plot i at time t (dimensionless) 
Wcontrol,i,j 
= Weight of control plot j matched to project plot i (value between 0 and 1; 
dimensionless) 
n_rst 
= Number of project plots with (k) matched control plots with values assessed 
at time t 
 
Weights of SI values for project plots in the time series are calculated as follows: 
ܹ௪௣,௜,௧= 
1
∑
݊_ݎݏ௧
௧
௧=0
 
(A4) 
Where: 
Wwp,i,t 
= Weight of project plot i at time t (dimensionless) 
n_rst 
=  Number of project plots with matched control plots (i,j) with values 
assessed at time t 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
72 
WSLR is used to derive ∆SIcontrol,t in Equation (A5) and ∆SIwp,t in Equation (A6). These equations 
estimate the slope of stocking index over time by calculating the weighted covariance between time and 
stocking index, divided by the weighted variance of time. 
∆ܵܫ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௧
= 
∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧× ݐ× ܵܫ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧)
௜,௝
− ∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧× ݐ)
௜,௝
× ∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧× ܵܫ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧)
௜,௝
∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧)
௜,௝
∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧× ݐ2)
௜,௝
− (∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧
݅,݆
× ݐ))
2
∑(ܹ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௜,௝,௧)
௜,௝
 
(A5) 
Where: 
ΔSIcontrol,t 
= 
Slope of stocking index of control plots over time 
Wcontrol,i,j,t  
= 
Weight of control plot j matched to project plot i, at time t 
SIcontrol,i,j,t 
= 
Stocking index of control plot j matched to project plot i, at time t 
t 
= 
1, 2, 3, …, t years elapsed since the project start date 
 
In Equation (A5), weights of control plots Wcontrol,i,j,t are calculated using Equation (A1), which reflects the 
relative representativeness of each control plot, and Equation (A3), which adjusts these weights over time 
based on the cumulative number of matched control plots. These weights are applied in the regression to 
reflect confidence in the quality of observation matching, based on pre-project conditions, and moderate 
the relative influence of each individual control plot observation as the data set grows over time.  
Note – Unlike some WLSR applications, these weights are not derived from estimation of residual error 
variance. 
∆ܵܫ௪௣,௧= 
∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧× ݐ× ܵܫ௪௣,௜,௧)
௜
−∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧× ݐ)
௜
× ∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧× ܵܫ௪௣,௜,௧)
௜
∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧)
௜
∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧× ݐ2)
௜
 −(∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧× ݐ)
௜
)
2
∑(ܹ௪௣,௜,௧)
௜
 
(A6) 
Where: 
ΔSIwp,t 
= 
Slope of stocking index of project plots over time 
Wwp,i,t  
= 
Weight of project plot i at time t 
SIwp,i,t 
= 
Stocking index of project plot i at time t 
t 
= 
1, 2, 3, …, t years elapsed since the project start date 
 
In Equation (A6), weights of project plots Wwp,i,t are calculated using the assigned weights from Equation 
(A4), which scale the cumulative number of project plots included in the analysis from t = 0 to time t. This 
ensures that all project plot observations are weighted equally while normalizing their relative influence 
as the number of observations grows over time. 
The significance of the difference between ΔSIcontrol,t and ΔSIwp,t is evaluated with a Z test to assess 
common practice additionality, as follows: 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
73 
ܼ= 
Δܵܫ௪௣,௧− Δܵܫ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௧
√ܵܧΔௌூ_௪௣,௧
2
+ ܵܧΔௌூ_௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௧
2
 
 
(A7) 
Where: 
Z 
= Z value (unitless) 
ΔSIcontrol,t 
= Weighted average annual increase (slope) in stocking index SI in control plots 
through time t 
ΔSIwp,t 
= Weighted average annual increase (slope) in stocking index SI in project plots 
through time t 
ܵܧΔௌூ_௪௣,௧
2
 
= Squared standard error of the average annual increase (slope) in stocking 
index SI in project plots through time t 
ܵܧΔௌூ_௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௧
2
 
= Squared standard error of the average annual increase (slope) in stocking 
index SI in control plots through time t 
t 
= 1, 2, 3, …, t years elapsed since the project start date 
Where the absolute value of Z is equal to or exceeds 1.96, parameters ΔSIcontrol,t and ΔSIwp,t are 
deemed significantly different. 
Projects that harvest as part of the project activity must reference the most recent version of the VCS 
Standard and follow the requirement for applying a long-term average. 
Step 6: Derive Performance Benchmark 
The performance benchmark is calculated by either pathway (a) or (b) as follows: 
a) Where parameters ΔSIcontrol,t and ΔSIwp,t are not significantly different (|Z| < 1.96, see 
above), PBt is set equal to 1 and Equation (A8) is not applicable. 
b) Where parameters ΔSIcontrol,t and ΔSIwp,t are significantly different (|Z| ≥ 1.96, see above), 
calculate the performance benchmark according to Equation (A8).  
ܲܤ௧= ∆ܵܫ௖௢௡௧௥௢௟,௧× 
1
Δܵܫ௪௣,௧
 
(A8) 
Where: 
PBt 
= Performance benchmark for the monitoring interval ending at year t 
(dimensionless)  
ΔSIcontrol,t 
= Average annual increase in stocking index, SI, in control plots through year 
t 
ΔSIwp,t 
= Average annual increase in stocking index, SI, in project plots through year 
t 
t 
= 1, 2, 3, …, t years elapsed since the project start date 
Where the slope coefficient of the control plots (ΔSIcontrol,t) is insignificant (P > 0.05) or less 
than zero, ΔSIcontrol,t is set equal to zero in Equation (A8). 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
74 
 
A1.5 Data and Parameters Monitored 
Data/Parameter 
SIcontrol,t  
SIwp,t 
Data unit 
unspecified 
Description 
Stocking index in scenario (control plot j or project plot i) at time t 
Equations 
(A5) (A6) 
Source of data 
SI is an unspecified remote sensing metric with demonstrated correlation 
with terrestrial aboveground carbon stocks (e.g., normalized difference 
fraction index18 from Landsat imagery, average canopy height derived 
from LiDAR, or percentage canopy cover interpreted from aerial imagery).  
Variability due to seasonality must be minimized (e.g., by setting a target 
data collection period at the project start and collecting all monitoring 
imagery from within that period). The target period should coincide with 
minimal seasonal phenological variation and where passive remote 
sensors are employed this should coincide with months of lowest cloud 
cover. 
Description of 
measurement methods 
and procedures to be 
applied 
Spatial scale/mapping unit: Divide the entire project area into equal-sized 
polygons from 0.01 hectares (10 × 10 m) to 10 hectares in area. At least 
75% of each polygon must be located within the project area boundary. 
Project plots may be represented by individual pixels or aggregates of 
pixels. 
Frequency of 
monitoring/recording 
At least annually 
QA/QC procedures to be 
applied 
The remote sensing metric applied must be: 
1) significantly correlated with terrestrial carbon stocks, at least 
with aboveground biomass, as previously demonstrated in 
published or peer-reviewed studies; or  
2) validated with direct measurements from the project region 
(collected from within the project ecoregion; ecoregion defined 
at the biome level following Olson et al. 2001). 
Processing and analysis of remote sensing data must apply established 
best practices, such as those found in:  
 
18 Souza Jr, C. M., D. A. Roberts, and M. A. Cochrane. 2005. “Combining spectral and spatial information to map canopy 
damage from selective logging and forest fires.” Remote Sensing of Environment 98 (2–3): 329–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2005.07.013 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
75 
Global Forest Observations Initiative. 2020. Integration of Remote-
Sensing and Ground-based Observations for Estimation of Emissions 
and Removals of Greenhouse Gases in Forests: Methods and 
Guidance from the Global Forest Observations Initiative, edition 3.0. 
U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization.19  
Mitchell, A. L., A. Rosenqvist, and B. Mora. 2017. “Current remote 
sensing approaches to monitoring forest degradation in support of 
countries measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) systems for 
REDD+.” Carbon Balance and Management 12: 9. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13021-017-0078-9 
In edition 3.0, GFOI endorses using biomass and biomass change maps 
“as a source of auxiliary data for increasing the precision of estimates of 
emissions, removals and/or emissions and removals factors based on 
ground plot reference data” as well as indicating that “[i]n the absence of 
ground data, global biomass maps can be used as sources of reference 
data for estimating biomass.” (in Chapter 4.3.1.2). 
Purpose of data 
Selection of control plots and derivation of performance benchmark for 
the area-based approach 
Calculation method 
Dependent on remote sensing metric used 
Comments 
SI may be derived using different remote sensing metrics for the selection 
of control plots and for monitoring the performance benchmark. It is 
expected that the same remote sensing technology may not be available 
for both the historical analysis (selection of control plots) and monitoring 
ex-post.  
The same remote sensing metric must be used for monitoring SI ex-post 
in both control plots and project sample plots. Where more accurate 
remote sensing metrics become available over time, the remote sensing 
metric used for monitoring SI ex-post may be changed when all the 
following apply: 
a) The new metric offers equivalent or better accuracy (in terms of 
terrestrial carbon stocks). 
b) The new metric can be harmonized with the previous metric, 
applying procedures from peer-reviewed literature20 to ensure 
data continuity and remove sources of misalignment (e.g., 
geometric, radiometric, and/or spectral artifacts) introduced by 
the new metric. 
c) 
The procedure to harmonize the new metric incorporates 
temporally coincident observations of both (previous and new) 
remote sensing metrics from the project and control plots from 
 
19 Available at: https://www.fs.usda.gov/research/treesearch/61714 
20 For example https://www.usgs.gov/landsat-missions 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
76 
within an overlap interval of at least two years, or as prescribed 
by the procedure. 
The location of all stocking index project and control plots must be 
included in the project description.  
 
VM0047, v1.1 
77 
APPENDIX 2: TESTING THE SIGNIFICANCE 
OF CARBON POOLS AND GHG SOURCES 
This appendix outlines a stepwise procedure for determining the significance of decreases in optional 
carbon pools and GHG emission sources (Es). All Es may be deemed de minimis and excluded from 
quantification if their combined impact (in t CO2e) is less than 5% of the total amount of carbon removal 
expected from the project, see Step 1, Equation (A9). Where the combined significance of optional pools 
and emissions sources is greater than 5% proceed to Step 2 Equation (A10) to determine which 
individual carbon pools and GHG emissions sources must be included.  
Note: – Leakage is excluded from this calculation as it must be accounted for regardless of the amount 
of quantified leakage emissions.  
Step 1: Determine Combined Significance of Es  
ܥܴܵ=
∑ܧ௦
ܥܴ 
(A9) 
 
1) Where CSR < 0.05 (i.e., less than 5%), all optional sources are deemed de minimis. 
2) Where CSR ≥ 0.05, proceed to Step 2 to determine which decreases in carbon pools and GHG 
emissions must be included.  
Step 2: Determine Significance of Individual Es  
For each Es, calculate its relative contributions (RCEs) to the total carbon pool decrease and GHG 
emissions sources (Es): 
ܴܥா௦= ܧ௦
∑ܧ௦
 
(A10) 
Where: 
RCEs 
= Relative contribution of each source s to the sum of project and leakage 
GHG emissions 
Es 
= GHG project emissions, and decreases in carbon pools (tCO2e) 
s 
= 1, 2, 3, …, S sources of project GHG emissions (excluding leakage) and 
decreases in carbon pools 
CSR 
= Combined significance ratio 
CR 
= Total carbon dioxide removals expected from the project (tCO2e) 
Es 
= Project emissions and decreases in optional carbon pools (tCO2e) 
s 
= 1, 2, 3, …, S sources of project GHG emissions and decreases in carbon 
pools 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
78 
1) Order Es according to their ranks from largest source to smallest.  
2) Add the sources starting from the largest. Stop when the cumulative total equals or exceeds 95%.  
3) Include all the sources that add up to, or exceed, 95%. 
4) Any remaining sources (those that make up the last 5%) may be excluded, but only if their 
combined impact is also less than 5% of total CR. If not, keep adding sources until that condition is 
met. 
 
 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
79 
APPENDIX 3: UNCERTAINTY EQUATIONS 
FOR CHANGING SAMPLING 
APPROACHES 
 
Section 8.5.1 shows how uncertainty deductions under the area-based approach are calculated when 
projects use one inventory approach across the entire crediting period. This appendix provides the 
stepwise approach for calculating the uncertainty deduction (UNCt) in the area-based approach when a 
project proponent switches sampling approaches, for example where a project proponent uses 
independent measurements (e.g., temporary plots) between t = 0 and an intermediate time t1, and then 
switches to permanent plots (i.e., dependent measurements) from t1 to any future time t. 
Step 1: Quantify the Standard Error for the First Inventory Period 
For the interval between t = 0 and t1, using independent plots (uncorrelated errors): 
ܵܧ∆஼,௧0 →௧1 = √ܵܧ௧=0
2
+ ܵܧ௧1
2   
(A11) 
Where: 
ܵܧ∆஼,௧0 →௧1 
= Standard error of mean carbon stock for the first inventory period (t CO2e) 
ܵܧ௧=0 
= Standard error of mean carbon stock estimate at time t = 0 (t CO2e) 
ܵܧ௧1 
= Standard error of mean carbon stock estimate at time t1 (t CO2e) 
 
Step 2: Quantify the Standard Error for the Second Inventory Period 
For the interval between t1 and t, using permanent plots (correlated errors): 
ܵܧ∆஼,௧1 →௧= √ܵܧ௧1
2 + ܵܧ௧
2 −(2 × ߩ× ܵܧ௧1 × ܵܧ௧)  
(A12) 
Where: 
ܵܧ∆஼,௧1 →௧ 
= Standard error of mean carbon stock for the subsequent inventory period (t CO2e) 
ܵܧ௧1 
= Standard error of mean carbon stock estimate at time t1 (t CO2e) 
ܵܧ௧ 
= Standard error of the mean carbon stock estimate at time t (t CO2e) 
ρ 
= Correlation coefficient between measurements at t1 and ݐ 
 
 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
80 
Step 3: Compute Total Standard Error Across the Full Period 
Assuming independent estimates across the two inventory periods (i.e., the t0→t1 period and the t1→t 
period are operationally distinct): 
ܵܧ∆஼௧0 →௧= √ܵܧ∆஼,௧0 →௧1
2
+ ܵܧ∆஼,௧1 →௧
2
  
(A13) 
∆ܥ௧0→௧= ܥ௧− ܥ௧0 
(A14) 
Step 4: Calculate the Total Carbon Stock Change Across the Full Period 
Or, if desired, express additively: 
∆ܥ௧0→௧= ∆ܥ௧0→௧1 + ∆ܥ௧1→௧ 
(A15) 
 
Step 5: Quantify the Final Uncertainty Deduction 
ܷܰܥ௧= MIN (100%, MAX (0, (ܶ × ܵܧ∆ܥݐ0→ݐ
∆ܥݐ0→ݐ
 ) −0.10) × 100) 
(A16) 
 
 
 
 
VM0047, v1.1