4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
4.1 
General 
This REDD+ Methodology Framework is a compilation of modules and tools that together define 
the project activity and necessary methodological steps. By choosing the appropriate modules, 
a project-specific methodology may be constructed. The justification of the choice of modules 
and why they are applicable to the proposed project activity must be given in the PD. 
Specific applicability conditions exist for each module and must be met in order for the module 
to be used. 
Use of this methodology is subject to the following applicability conditions, noting that the 
project must also comply with the applicability conditions of the applied modules and tools. 
4.2 
REDD 
4.2.1 All REDD Activity Types 
REDD activity types are applicable under the following conditions: 
1) Land in the project area has qualified as forest (following the definition used by the 
VCS; in addition, see Section 5.1.2) for at least the 10 years prior to the project start 
date. Mangrove forests are excluded from any tree height requirement in a forest 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
14 
definition, as they consist of 95 percent mangrove species, which often do not reach 
the same height as other tree species. Mangroves occupy contiguous areas and their 
functioning as a forest is independent of tree height. 
2) Where land within the project area is peatland or tidal wetlands and emissions from the 
SOC pool are deemed significant, the relevant WRC modules (see Table 3) are applied 
alongside other relevant modules. 
3) Baseline deforestation in the project area falls within either of the following categories: 
a) Unplanned deforestation (VCS category AUDef) 
b) Planned deforestation (VCS category APDef) 
REDD activity types are not applicable under the following condition: 
4) Leakage prevention activities include: 
a) Flooding agricultural lands to increase production (e.g., rice paddies); and/or 
b) Intensifying livestock production through use of feed-lots 7F9 and/or manure 
lagoons.8F10 
4.2.2 Avoiding Unplanned Deforestation 
Avoiding unplanned deforestation activities are applicable under the following conditions: 
5) Baseline agents of deforestation meet all of the following criteria:  
a) Clear the land for tree harvesting, settlements, crop production (agriculturalist), 
ranching or aquaculture, where such clearing for crop production, ranching or 
aquaculture does not amount to large scale industrial agriculture or aquaculture 
activities;9F11 
b) Have no documented and uncontested legal right to deforest the land for these 
purposes; and  
c) Are either residents in the reference region for deforestation (see Section 5.1.2 
below) or immigrants.  
Under any other condition this methodology must not be used. 
Avoiding unplanned deforestation activities are not applicable under the following condition: 
6) Post-deforestation land use in the baseline scenario constitutes reforestation. 
 
9 Feedlots are defined as areas in which naturally grazing animals are confined to an area which produces no feed 
and are fed on stored feeds. 
10 Anaerobic lagoons that function as receptacles for animal waste flushed from animal pens. Anaerobic organisms 
present in the manure and the environment decompose the waste in the lagoon. 
11 Small-scale/large-scale agriculture or aquaculture is to be defined and justified by the project. 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
15 
4.2.3 Avoiding Planned Deforestation 
Avoiding planned deforestation activities are applicable under the following condition: 
7) Where conversion of forest lands to a deforested condition is legally permitted 
4.3 
WRC 
4.3.1 All WRC Activity Types 
WRC activities are not eligible under the following conditions: 
8) Project activities lower the water table, unless the project converts open water to tidal 
wetlands, or improves the hydrological connection to impounded waters. 
9) Changes in hydrology do not result in the accumulation or maintenance of SOC stock, 
noting that a) this pertains to projects that intend to sequester carbon through 
sedimentation and/or vegetation development and b) this does not pertain to projects 
that increase salinity to reduce CH4 emissions. Projects that aim to decrease CH4 
emissions through increased salinity must account for any changes in SOC stocks. 
10) Hydrological connectivity of the project area with adjacent areas leads to a significant 
increase in GHG emissions outside the project area. 
11) Project activities include the burning of organic soil. 
12) Nitrogen fertilizer(s), such as chemical fertilizer or manure, are applied in the project 
area during the project crediting period. 
4.3.2 RWE Project Activities 
RWE project activities are applicable under the following conditions: 
13) Prior to the project start date, the project area meets one of the following criteria: 12F12 
a) The project area is free of any land use that may be displaced outside the project 
area, as demonstrated by at least one of the following, where relevant: 
i) 
The project area has been abandoned for two or more years prior to the project 
start date; or  
ii) 
Use of the project area for commercial purposes (i.e., trade) is not profitable as 
a result of salinity intrusion, market forces or other factors. In addition, timber 
harvesting in the baseline scenario within the project area does not occur; or  
iii) 
Degradation of additional wetlands for new agricultural/aquacultural sites 
within the country will not occur or is prohibited by enforced law. 
 
12 These conditions are included to avoid leakage. 
 
VM0007, v1.8