1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION  
Additionality, Crediting Method,1 and Mitigation Outcome 
 
Additionality 
Performance Method (area-based) or Project Method (census-based) 
Crediting Baseline 
Performance Method (area-based) or Project Method (census-based) 
Mitigation Outcome 
Removals 
 
This methodology applies to afforestation, reforestation, and revegetation (ARR) activities and 
provides two quantification approaches: area-based and census-based. Project activities must 
establish, increase, or restore vegetative cover in non-forest areas (applicable to both 
approaches), or activities must enhance forest carbon stocks in areas with existing forest cover 
that have not been managed for wood products in the past ten years (applicable to the area-
based approach only).  
1.1 
Summary of the Area-based Approach  
The area-based approach applies to ARR projects that change land cover from non-forest to 
forest or enhance stocks in existing forests. Detectable changes in vegetative cover measured 
using remote sensing and plot-based sampling serve as the basis for quantifying carbon 
removals. The area-based approach: 
1) uses traditional plot-based sampling methods to estimate biomass per unit area, scaling 
these estimates to the project level based on the total project area within the boundary. 
2) uses a dynamic performance benchmark to assess additionality and determine the 
crediting baseline at each verification. The performance benchmark is derived from ex-
post observations that compare the change in vegetative stocking index (SI) between 
remotely sensed project and matched control plots. 
3) does not apply to projects that can use the census-based approach. 
4) applies VMD0054 Module for Estimating Leakage from ARR Activities to quantify 
leakage. The module provides a standardized approach to account for leakage related to 
the displacement of pre-project agricultural activities caused by the baseline agent 
(activity-shifting leakage) and other actors (market leakage). 
 
1 See Section 7 for additional information. 
 
VM0047, v1.1 
6 
1.2 
Summary of the Census-based Approach  
The census-based approach applies to ARR projects that do not occur in forests and do not result 
in land use changes. This approach enables the inclusion of ARR activities that would otherwise 
be difficult to quantify under the area-based approach. The census-based approach: 
1) applies only to projects that involve direct planting. 
2) limits planting density to a maximum of 50 planting units per hectare. 
3) uses a complete census of all planting units (established as N, the total number of 
planting units) at t=0.  
4) estimates biomass through sampling and measurement of planting units, then scales to 
the project level using the number of planting units (N) as a multiplier. 
5) uses a project method to demonstrate additionality and determine the crediting baseline. 
6) is exempt from applying a leakage deduction because projects must not result in a 
change to existing land use.