3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions, the following definitions 
apply to this methodology. 
Aerosol 
A liquefied or compressed gas used to propel active ingredients in liquid, paste, or powder form 
in precise spray patterns with controlled droplet sizes and amounts. Typical aerosol products 
use a propellant that is a gas at atmospheric pressure and pressurized liquid in the can. 
Aggregation facility 
A facility where ODS or HFC refrigerants, blowing agents, fire suppression agents, or propellants 
are recovered from appliances, appliance insulation foam, fire suppression systems, or 
aerosols, or where these collected substances are aggregated in preparation for destruction. A 
location at which refrigerant is recovered from stationary equipment (e.g., a chiller) does not 
classify as an aggregation facility.  
Blowing agent 
An ozone-depleting substance or hydrofluorocarbon added to liquid plastic resin that generates 
inert gases on heating, causing the resin to assume a cellular structure. 
Collection 
The process by which ODS or HFC refrigerants, blowing agents, fire suppression agents, or 
propellants are obtained by the project proponent from a third-party source. 
Destruction facility 
A facility where ODS or HFC are destroyed by one of the technologies approved by the 
Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP) under the Montreal Protocol.  
Fire suppression agent 
An ozone-depleting substance or hydrofluorocarbon used or intended for use in fire suppression 
equipment. 
Fire suppression system 
A total flooding system or streaming application: 
• 
Total flooding system: engineered to discharge a fire suppressing agent, automatically by 
detection and related controls or manually by a systems operator, to achieve a specified 
minimum agent concentration throughout a confined space. Total flooding systems create a 
fire suppressing or extinguishing atmosphere in a defined volume (enclosed space). 
• 
Streaming application: use of portable fire extinguishers intended as a first line of defense 
that can be manually operated to discharge an agent in a specific direction and release a 
specific quantity of extinguishing agent to address fires of limited size 
VM0016, v2.0 
7 
Government stockpile 
A stockpile of CFC, HCFC, or HFC, whether neat or in a mixture, that is held by a government 
agency and cannot re-enter the stream of commerce (e.g., material that was seized by the 
government). 
Hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) 
A man-made compound that contains fluorine and hydrogen atoms. Many HFCs have a high 
global warming potential (GWP) and are therefore greenhouse gases.  
Ozone-depleting substances (ODS) 
A family of man-made compounds that includes, but is not limited to, chlorofluorocarbons 
(CFCs), bromofluorocarbons (halons), methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, methyl bromide, 
and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). These compounds deplete stratospheric ozone. Many 
ODS have high global warming potential and are therefore greenhouse gases. CFC ozone-
depleting substances are listed in Tables A1 and A2 in Appendix 1. HCFC ozone-depleting 
substances are listed in Table A3 in Appendix 1. 
Propellant  
An ozone-depleting substance or hydrofluorocarbon used or intended for use in propeller 
systems such as aerosol equipment. 
Reclaim 
To reprocess used ODS or HFC refrigerants, blowing agents, fire suppression agents, or 
propellants, typically by distillation, to specifications similar to those of virgin product (e.g., 
meeting the U.S. Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute [AHRI] 700-2006 
standard). 
Recovery 
To remove ODS or HFC refrigerants, blowing agents, fire suppression agents, or propellants in 
any condition from a system and store in an external container. 
Recycle 
To extract ODS or HFC refrigerants from an appliance and clean it using oil separation and 
single or multiple passes through filter driers, which reduce moisture, acidity, and particulate 
matter. 
Refrigerant 
An ODS or HFC used or intended for use in a cooling mechanism, such as refrigerators, air 
conditioners, heat pumps and chillers, as the heat carrier that changes from gas to liquid and 
then back to gas. 
Refrigeration appliance 
An appliance whose main purpose is the cooling of foodstuffs and other temperature-sensitive 
products, including domestic refrigerators, domestic refrigerator-freezers, and domestic chest 
or upright freezers. 
VM0016, v2.0 
8 
Stockpile 
A CFC, HCFC, or HFC, whether neat or in a mixture, stored in an external container by a single 
person or entity (e.g., private companies, organizations, government agencies), or by multiple 
people or entities at a single location. A stockpile may be composed of one or more containers 
of any size. Containers in a stockpile may consist of recovered, reclaimed, recycled, or unused 
(manufactured for use but never used) CFC, HCFC, or HFC.