6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
The following steps must be applied to establish the baseline scenario. 
6.1 
Step 1: Define the Applicable Geographic Area 
The default applicable geographic area is the entire host country. The project proponent may 
choose to limit the applicable geographic area to a specific geographic area within the host 
VM0016, v2.0 
13 
country. In this case, the project proponent must justify the essential distinctions between the 
applicable geographic region and the rest of the host country that lead to different 
implementation conditions specific to the project activity. Relevant factors are limited to: 
1) Subsidies, policies, laws, or regulations 
2) Infrastructure development and accessibility 
6.2 
Step 2: Define Alternative Scenarios to the Proposed Project Activity 
The following alternative scenarios must be assessed, depending on the project activity. For 
project activities including a combination of ODS and HFC refrigerants, blowing agents, fire 
suppressants and/or aerosol propellants, the baseline scenario must be assessed for each of 
the products included. 
For ODS and HFC refrigerants, realistic and credible alternatives may include, amongst others: 
R1: 
The proposed project activity is undertaken without being registered under a GHG 
program. 
R2: 
Products containing the refrigerant are disposed of at an incineration facility and 
thereby ODS or HFC refrigerants are destroyed.  
R3: 
Products are disposed of at a landfill/dump with eventual atmospheric release of ODS 
or HFC refrigerant. 
R4: 
Atmospheric release of ODS or HFC refrigerant with potentially partial capture and 
destruction. 
R5: 
Atmospheric release of ODS or HFC refrigerant with potentially partial capture and 
reuse in existing products or continued storage in stockpile. 
For ODS and HFC blowing agents, realistic and credible alternatives may include, amongst others: 
BA1: 
The proposed project activity is undertaken without being registered under a GHG 
program.   
BA2: 
Refrigerators containing foams (blowing agents) are disposed of at an incineration 
facility and thereby ODS or HFC blowing agents are destroyed.  
BA3: 
Refrigerators containing foams (blowing agents) are disposed of at a landfill/dump 
with eventual atmospheric release. 
BA4: 
Before final disposal, refrigerators containing foam are shredded or intact foam is 
removed from refrigerators and shredded. The foams are subsequently disposed of at 
a landfill/dump.  
VM0016, v2.0 
14 
For ODS and HFC fire suppressants, realistic and credible alternatives may include, amongst 
others: 
 
 
For ODS and HFC aerosol propellants, realistic and credible alternatives may include, amongst 
others: 
6.3 
Step 3: Check Consistency with Mandatory Applicable Laws and 
Regulations 
The project proponent must use Step 1b of the most recent version of VT0008 Additionality 
Assessment to identify the alternative scenarios from Step 1a that comply with all mandatory 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements within the applicable geographic region. 
When applying this step, all relevant policies and regulations in the applicable geographic 
region related to the management of ODS or HFC must be taken into account, including those 
that may provide a financial incentive or include mandatory ODS or HFC capture or destruction 
requirements. 
Where ODS or HFC is recovered from products that have been imported specifically for their 
disassembly (i.e., the products have not been collected in the host country), the products must 
not originate from any country in which any law, statute or other regulatory framework requires 
the recovery and destruction of the relevant ODS of HFC from such products. 
Project proponents must provide the list of alternative scenarios to the project activity that 
comply with mandatory legislation and regulations, considering enforcement in the applicable 
geographic region, following Step 1b of VT0008. 
FS1: 
The proposed project activity is undertaken without being registered under a GHG 
program.  
FS2: 
Fire suppression equipment is disposed of at a landfill/dump with eventual 
atmospheric release of ODS or HFC fire suppression agent. 
FS3: 
Atmospheric release of ODS or HFC fire suppression agent with potentially partial 
capture and destruction. 
FS4: 
Atmospheric release of ODS or HFC fire suppression agent with potentially partial 
capture and reuse in existing products or continued storage in stockpile. 
AP1: 
The proposed project activity is undertaken without being registered under a GHG 
program.  
AP2: 
Aerosol products containing propellant are disposed of at an incineration facility and 
thereby ODS or HFC propellants are destroyed. 
AP3: 
Aerosol products containing propellant are landfilled with eventual atmospheric 
release of ODS or HFC propellant. 
AP4: 
Atmospheric release of ODS or HFC aerosol propellants. 
VM0016, v2.0 
15 
Where the proposed project activity is the only remaining alternative, the proposed project 
activity is the baseline scenario. Otherwise, proceed to Section 6.4. 
6.4 
Step 4: Apply a Barrier Analysis 
Project proponents must apply Step 2 (barrier analysis) of the most recent version of VT0008 
Additionality Assessment to all remaining alternatives identified in Section 6.3. 
If additionality is demonstrated through a positive list or an investment analysis (Section 7), 
project proponents may exclude the project scenario itself and assess only the other remaining 
alternatives. In this case, Step 2b and Step 2d of the barrier analysis4 in VT0008 are not 
required. 
Project proponents must provide a list of alternative scenarios that do not face any barrier. 
Where the proposed project activity is the only remaining alternative, the proposed project 
activity is the baseline scenario.  
Otherwise, if the project is demonstrated to be additional, the baseline scenario is represented 
by the remaining alternative (if only one remains) or by a combination of the remaining 
alternatives (if multiple remain) consistent with step 5 below. 
6.5 
Step 5: Confirm Eligibility of Baseline Scenario 
This methodology is only applicable for ODS or HFC where the baseline scenario is one or a 
combination of the following: 
• 
Refrigerants: R3, R4, R5, or a combination of these 
• 
Blowing agents: BA3, BA4, or a combination of these 
• 
Fire suppressants: FS2, FS3, FS4, or a combination of these 
• 
Aerosol propellants: AP3, AP4, or a combination of these