10 REFERENCES 
IPCC. 2003. Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry. Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). http://www.ipcc-
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/gpglulucf/gpglulucf.html  
IPCC. 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Institute for Global 
Environmental Strategies (IGES). http://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/index.html 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
51 
APPENDIX 1: TESTING SIGNIFICANCE OF 
GHG EMISSIONS 
When a project does not meet the applicability conditions of T-SIG22F22, the following stepwise procedure 
must be used to test the significance of GHG emissions. It is an adaptation of the CDM Tool for testing 
the significance of GHG emissions in A/R CDM project activities, v01. The procedure may be used to 
justify the omission of pools and GHG sources within the project boundaries, as well as to justify the 
omission of GHG emissions resulting from leakage mitigation measures.  
The significance of GHG emissions by source and carbon stock changes by pool must be at minimum 
tested ex ante to justify the project boundaries and at baseline reassessment. The significance of 
leakage GHG emissions must be tested ex ante for the entire baseline validity period and ex post for a 
specific monitoring period.  
1) Define the period over which the significance will be tested (i.e., either a baseline validity period 
for ex ante estimates or a specific monitoring period or annually for ex post estimates).  
2) Identify and estimate the following where relevant:  
a) GHG emissions by source (per each source) to be included and tested for the specified 
period. Estimation must be based on site/project-specific data, scientific peer-reviewed 
literature and/or the most recent default emission factors provided by IPCC.   
b) GHG emissions attributable to net carbon stock changes by pool (per each pool to be 
included and tested). The estimation of net carbon stock changes must follow the 
methodology and be consistent with the baseline scenario and project activities. 
Estimation must be based on site/project-specific data, scientific peer-reviewed literature 
and/or the most recent default emission factors provided by IPCC.   
c) Leakage GHG emissions by source attributable to the project leakage mitigation 
measures (i.e., net carbon stock changes in above- and belowground tree biomass, 
emissions associated with biomass burning and nitrogen application) that the planned 
leakage mitigation measures are expected to cause during the fixed baseline period. 
Estimation must follow sound procedures consistent with calculation approaches in the 
applicable activity-type module(s). Estimation must be based on site/project-specific 
data, scientific peer-reviewed literature and/or the most recent default emission factors 
provided by IPCC.  
3) Where needed, convert the GHG emissions to CO2e using 100-year global warming potential 
(GWP) values from the latest version of the VCS Standard.   
4) Calculate the relative contributions of the GHG emissions listed in Step 2a–c above according 
to Equation (19):   
 
 
22 All projects except standalone ARR or RWE projects. 
 
VM0007, v1.8 
52 
RCEi=Ei∑Ii=1Ei 
(19)  
Where:  
RCEi 
=  
Relative contribution of each source i to the sum of project and leakage 
GHG emissions  
Ei 
=  
GHG project and leakage emissions for source i as estimated under 
Step 2a–c above  
i  
=  
Index for individual sources of project and leakage GHG emissions due 
to leakage mitigation measures (I = total number of sources considered 
in Step 1)  
5) Rank the GHG emissions in descending order of their relative contributions RCEi and order them 
according to their ranks (i.e., the lowest emission must get the highest rank and must occupy 
the last position in the ordered sequence of leakage emissions).  
6) Start calculating the cumulative sum of the relative contributions RCEi (ordered according to 
Step 5), beginning with the lowest rank. Cease the summation when the cumulative sum 
reaches the lowest value not less than the threshold of 0.95.  
The GHG and project leakage emissions by source excluded from the cumulative sum in Step 6 are 
considered insignificant where their total is lower than five percent of net anthropogenic GHG ERRs in 
the project area. Otherwise, the procedure described in Step 6 must be continued beyond the threshold 
of 0.95 until this condition is met. Even where they are insignificant, project proponents may include 
any qualifying sources and sinks in the project case.  
For the purposes of testing GHG emissions significance, the net GHG ERRs must be calculated before 
discounting the cumulative GHG emissions resulting from leakage.  
Significance test calculations must be summarized in the project description or monitoring reports and 
detailed in a calculation spreadsheet to be shared with the validation/verification body and Verra.  
 
 
 
VM0007, v1.8