5 PROJECT BOUNDARY 
5.1 
GHG Sources and Sinks 
The carbon pools included in or excluded from the project boundary are shown in Table 1. 
Table 1: Selected Carbon Pools 
Carbon Pools 
Selected? 
Justification/Explanation 
Above-ground 
biomass 
Yes 
Major carbon pool subjected to the project activity 
Below-ground 
biomass 
Yes 
Below-ground biomass stock is expected to increase due to 
implementation of the IFM project activity. Below-ground 
biomass subsequent to harvest is not assessed based on the 
conservative assumption of immediate emission. 
Dead wood 
Conditional 
Dead wood stocks may be conservatively excluded unless the 
project scenario produces greater levels of slash than the 
baseline and slash is burned as part of forest management. 
Where slash produced in the project scenario is left in the 
forest to become part of the dead wood pool, dead wood may 
be conservatively excluded. Alternatively, project proponents 
may elect to include the pool (where included, the pool must be 
estimated in both the baseline and with-project scenarios) as 
long as the dead wood pool represents less than 50 percent of 
total carbon volume on the site in any given modeled year. 
Litter 
No 
Changes in the litter pool will be de minimis as a result of 
rotation extension. 
 
VM0003, v1.3  
 
6 
 
Soil organic carbon 
No 
Changes in the soil organic carbon pool will be de minimis as a 
result of rotation extension. 
Wood products 
Conditional 
This stock may increase or decrease (compared to baseline) 
due to implementation of the project activity. The methodology 
provides an approach for accounting for this pool, but the pool 
may be excluded if transparent and verifiable information 
demonstrates that carbon stocks in wood products are rising 
faster in the project scenario than in the baseline or are 
decreasing faster in the baseline than in the project scenario. 
 
The emission sources included in or excluded from the project boundary are shown in Table 2. 
Any of these sources may be neglected (i.e., accounted as zero) where application of the most 
recent CDM Tool for testing significance of GHG emissions in A/R project activities leads to the 
conclusion that the emission source is insignificant.  
 
Table 2: GHG Sources Included In or Excluded From the Project Boundary1 
Source 
Gas 
Included? 
Justification/Explanation 
Baseline 
Burning of 
biomass 
CO2 
Excluded 
Carbon stock decreases due to burning are 
accounted as a carbon stock change. 
CH4 
Included 
Non-CO2 gas emitted from biomass burning 
N2O 
Excluded 
Potential emissions are negligible. 
Project 
Burning of 
biomass 
CO2 
Excluded 
Carbon stock decreases due to burning are 
accounted as a carbon stock change. 
CH4 
Included 
Non-CO2 gas emitted from biomass burning 
N2O 
Excluded 
Potential emissions are negligible. 
 
5.2 
Project Area and Eligibility of Land 
The project area geographically delineates the improved forest management project activity 
under the control of the project proponents. The IFM project activity may contain more than one 
discrete area of land. At validation, the following must be defined: 
1) Each discrete area of land must have a unique geographic identification. 
 
1 Following the guidance of the Executive Board of the CDM, emissions caused by combustion of fossil fuels and through the 
use of fertilizers are considered insignificant and are not considered here (UNFCCC CDM EB 44, UNFCCC CDM EB 42). 
 
 
VM0003, v1.3  
 
7 
 
2) Aggregation of forest properties with multiple landowners is permitted under the 
methodology with aggregated areas treated as a single project area. 
3) The project proponents must describe legal title to the forest, rights of access to the 
sequestered carbon (or avoided carbon emissions), current land tenure, and forest 
management for each discrete area of forest. 
4) The project proponents must justify that, during the project lifetime, each discrete area 
of land is expected to be subject to a change in forest management through activities 
under the control of the project proponents.