7 ADDITIONALITY 
This methodology uses a project method for the demonstration of additionality. The project 
proponent must apply the following steps. 
Step 1: Demonstrate regulatory surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the latest version of the VCS Standard.  
Step 2: Identify barriers that would prevent implementation of a practice that keeps food from 
leaving the human supply chain 
The project proponent must determine whether there are barriers (e.g., investment, institutional, 
cultural, social) to the proposed activity’s adoption. The identified barriers are sufficient grounds 
for demonstrating additionality only where they prevent potential project proponents from 
carrying out the proposed project activity unless it is registered as a VCS project. 
The project proponent must document and describe the barriers to implementation of a practice 
that keeps food in the human supply chain. Such barriers may include the following, among 
others:  
1) Investment barriers, for example:  
a) Similar activities in the region have been implemented only with grants or other 
non-commercial finance terms; 
b) The cost of discarding food is lower than the cost of keeping it in the human supply 
chain; 
c) Current economics limit adoption of new supply chains or other innovative projects 
(e.g., upcycling FLW) because the consumer market is underdeveloped. 
2) Institutional barriers, for example:  
a) Lack of skilled and/or properly trained labor familiar with FLW tracking and 
monitoring; 
b) Disjointed markets, transport, and storage;  
c) Overly strict quality standards for perishable items;  
d) Food item expiry dates that do not accurately reflect edibility;  
e) Established supply chain processes for efficiency/transport purposes are difficult 
and expensive to break, thus discards are accepted as part of business/supply 
chain process; 
f) 
Contractual/legal agreements related to the price and purchase of food. 
3) Cultural and social barriers, for example:  
a) Lack of motivating incentives to change practices;  
b) Lack of visibility of the issue;  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
12 
 
c) High aesthetic standards for produce and a consumer tendency to not purchase 
suboptimal foods; 
d) Activity is the “first of its kind”12, or no activity of this type is currently operational in 
the host country or region (defined as within 200 km of project area). 
The project proponent must provide documented evidence from an independent, third-party 
source that demonstrates the existence of the identified barriers. The types of evidence may 
include: 
• 
Peer-reviewed and/or published studies; 
• 
Relevant studies or surveys undertaken by universities, research institutions, NGOs, 
companies, bilateral/multilateral institutions; or 
• 
Relevant statistical data from national or international statistics.  
 
Anecdotal evidence may be included but alone is not sufficient proof of barriers. Guidance for the 
objective demonstration of barriers to implementation of the project activity can be drawn from 
Annex 13 of the CDM’s Guidelines for Objective Demonstration and Assessment of Barriers13. 
 
Step 3: Demonstrate that adoption of the proposed project activity (or activities) is not common 
practice 
Unless the project activity was demonstrated to be “first of its kind” in Step 2, this step is 
required.  
The project proponent must determine whether the proposed project activity, or scope of 
activities,14 are common practice in each region included within the project spatial boundary 
(defined as encompassing the jurisdiction(s) where food ends up (the FLW destination) under the 
baseline scenario, as well as the jurisdiction(s) where the recovered food is used or consumed as 
a result of the project activities). Common practice is defined as greater than 20 percent 
adoption rate15 in the applicable geographic area based on the amount of food being recovered 
relative to the quantity wasted. 
Common practice analysis must be completed based on the implementation of similar project 
activities over the ten years immediately prior to the project start date (e.g., gleaning of surplus 
produce) in: 
1) the relevant stage in the supply chain (e.g., at the farm level, retail, etc.); 
 
12 Drawing from CDM Methodological Tool 23: Additionality of first-of-its-kind project activities, a “first of its kind” activity 
means the project is the first in the applicable geographic area to apply a technology that is different from technologies 
implemented by any other projects that are able to deliver the same output and have started commercial operation in the 
applicable geographic area before the project design document is published for stakeholder consultation or before the start 
date of the proposed project activity. 
13 https://cdm.unfccc.int/EB/050/eb50_repan13.pdf  
14 This refers to all activities implemented across an aggregated project. 
15 Based on the latest version of the CDM Methodological tool: Common practice.  
 
VM0046, v1.0 
13 
 
2) the same region; and 
3) at a similar scale as the project (defined as +/-50% of kg food diverted annually).  
Evidence must be independent and provided in the form of publicly available information 
contained in peer-reviewed scientific literature; independent research data; and/or reports or 
assessments compiled by industry or trade associations. The highest quality available evidence 
source appropriate to the project must be used. Evidence at the second order jurisdictional level 
(i.e., state or province) where the project is being developed is preferred. Where supporting 
evidence is not available at this level, aggregated data at a country or regional level may be used, 
with justification.  
A project proponent may include project instances where more than one activity to keep food 
from leaving the human supply chain will be implemented at the same location.16 If this is the 
case, the common practice assessment must be completed for each individual project activity 
(unless the project activity was demonstrated to be “first of its kind” in Step 2).  
Where the above steps are satisfied, the proposed project activity is additional.