3 
DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in VCS document Program Definitions, the below definitions 
and acronyms apply to this methodology. In some cases, for projects being developed in the 
province of Britishc Columbia (BC), it has been necessary to provide definitions of terms in this 
methodology which are also defined in the VCS Program Definitions document, in order to ensure 
consistency with the BC Emission Offset Regulation (EOR), or to avoid confusion with standard 
BC practices or usages. In these cases, the definitions given in this methodology must be used. 
Where projects are developed in other provinces of Canada, the VCS definitions must be applied. 
Activity Shifting Leakage 
An increase in GHG emissions from areas outside the project area, which is caused by the 
project activity, and which occurs when the actual agent of deforestation and/or degradation 
moves to or undertakes activities in an area outside of the project area and continues their 
deforesting and/or degrading activities in that location 
Additionality 
The concept that a project’s emission reductions and removal enhancements must go beyond (ie, 
be additional to) what would have occurred in the absence of the GHG offset project.  In the BC 
EOR, projects are deemed additional where they can demonstrate that the incentive of having a 
GHG reduction recognized as an emission offset is a key factor in overcoming financial, 
technological or other obstacles to carrying out the project. Additionality is determined following 
the procedure described in Section 7. 
Affected SSP 
A GHG source, sink, or carbon pool influenced by a project activity through changes in market 
demand or supply for associated products or services, or through physical displacement 
Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation (ARR)11 
See definition in the VCS Methodology Requirements.. 
Baseline Scenario 
The most likely sequence of events and actions which would be expected to occur in the absence 
of the project activity 
CO2 Equivalent (CO2e) 
The universal unit of measurement to indicate the global warming potential (GWP) of each of the 
six GHG, expressed in terms of the GWP of one unit of carbon dioxide. It is used to evaluate 
releasing (or avoiding releasing) different GHG against a common basis. 
Controlled SSP 
 
11 The term “afforestation” is used interchangeably with ARR within this methodology because “afforestation” 
is a defined term within British Columbia’s Forest Inventory legislation. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
10 
A GHG source, sink, or carbon pool whose operation is under the direction and influence of 
project proponents through financial, policy, management or other instruments 
Crediting Period 
The time period for which GHG emission reductions or removals generated by the project are 
eligible for issuance as VCUs, the rules with respect to the length of such time period and the 
renewal of the project crediting period being set out in the VCS Standard.12  Equivalent to the 
“validation period” under the BC EOR. 
 
Crown Land(s) 
Land, whether or not it is covered in water, or an interest in land, vested in the government of the 
Province of British Columbia. 
De Minimis 
Carbon pools or GHG sources may be deemed de minimis and are not required to be accounted 
for if together the total decrease in carbon stocks or increase in GHG emissions under the project 
scenario as compared with the baseline scenario for the omitted pools and sources amounts to 
less than 5% of the total GHG benefit generated by the project 
Emission factor 
A factor allowing GHG emissions or removals to be estimated from available activity data (e.g., 
tonnes of fuel consumed, tonnes of product produced) 
Ex-ante 
An analysis or quantification of future events or conditions 
Ex-post 
An analysis or quantification of past events or conditions 
 
FCOP 
BC Forest Carbon Offset Protocol 
Forest Land 
Land on which a forest is found, with the definition of forest being the current definition used by 
Canada for reporting under the United Nations Convention on Climate Change (UNCCC). Project 
proponents must check to ensure that they are using the most current version of this definition.  
At the time of writing of this methodology, the definition was13: 
An area:  
 
12 This definition is as given in the VCS Program Definitions.  The most recent definition given by the VCS 
may be used. 
13 http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pages/97 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
11 
• 
That is greater than or equal to one hectare in size measured tree-base to tree-base 
(stump to stump), and has a minimum width of 20 m, and;  
• 
Where trees on the area are capable of achieving:  
o 
A minimum height of 5 metres at maturity; and  
o 
A minimum crown cover of 25% at maturity. 
Forest land may include areas normally forming part of the forest area which are temporarily 
unstocked as a result of human intervention such as harvesting, or as a result of natural causes, 
but which are expected to revert to forest. 
Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
A factor describing the radiative forcing impact of one mass-based unit of a given GHG relative to 
an equivalent unit of carbon dioxide over a given period of time. 
Greenhouse Gases (GHG) 
GHGs include the six gases listed in the Kyoto Protocol: carbon dioxide (CO2); methane (CH4); 
nitrous oxide (N2O); hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs); perfluorocarbons (PFCs); and sulphur 
hexafluoride (SF6) 
Grouped Projects 
See definition as set out in the VCS Program Definitions and specific requirements as set out in 
the VCS Standard. 
Harvested Wood Products 
Equivalent to “wood products” as defined in the VCS Program Definitions 
Improved Forest Management (IFM) 
See definition in the VCS Methodology Requirements. 
Leakage zone 
An area or areas in the region of, but outside of, the project area where activities could be 
undertaken which are similar to those undertaken within the project area under the baseline 
scenario.  Assessment of activity shifting leakage will be undertaken within the leakage zone. 
Market Leakage 
An increase in GHG emissions from areas outside the project area, which occurs as a result of 
the project significantly reducing the production of a commodity, causing a change in the supply 
and market demand equilibrium, which results in a shift of production elsewhere to make up for 
the lost supply 
Monitoring 
The continuous or periodic assessment and documentation of GHG emissions and removals or 
other GHG-related data 
 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
12 
Monitoring Report 
A document which records data to allow the assessment of the GHG emission reductions or 
removals generated by the project during a given time period in accordance with the monitoring 
plan set out in the project description, prepared using the VCS Monitoring Report Template. 
Where projects are developed within the province of BC, the report must contain data relevant to 
the project as required in Section 5 or Section 7 of the BC EOR, whichever is applicable. 
Parameter 
A variable. A characteristic of an object, process or analysis for which quantitative values can be 
determined. 
Project Area 
The area or areas of land on which project proponents will undertake the project activities. 
Project Description 
The document that describes the project’s GHG emission reduction or removal activities, and that 
uses the VCS Project Description Template. This document is referred to as the project plan 
within the BC Emission Offset regulation. The project description must be prepared in accordance 
VCS rules, and with Section 3 or 7, whichever applies, of the BC Emission Offset regulation. 
Project Report 
See the definition of monitoring report. 
Project Scenario 
The actions and events which are expected to occur as a result of implementing the project. 
 
Project Plan 
See definition of project description. 
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD)  
See definition in the VCS Methodology Requirements. 
Registered Professional 
An applied scientist who is: 
• 
Registered and in good standing in the respective province with an appropriate 
professional organization constituted under corresponding provincial legislation, acting 
under the organization´s code of ethics and subject to disciplinary action by that 
organization, and; 
• 
Acting within that individual’s area of expertise. 
Related SSP 
A GHG source, sink, or carbon pool that has material or energy flows into, out of, or within the 
project 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
13 
Sink 
Any physical unit or process that removes GHGs from the atmosphere 
Source 
Any physical unit or process that releases GHG into the atmosphere 
SSP 
Acronym for sources, sinks and carbon pools. Equivalent to SSR (sources, sinks, and reservoirs), 
as per ISO 14064-2.