6 BASELINE SCENARIO 
6.1 
Selected Baseline Approach 
Changes in carbon stocks in the pools within the project boundary from the most likely land use 
at the time the project starts. 
6.2 
Preliminary Screening Based on the IFM Project Activity Start Date 
In accordance with the VCS Standard, projects using this methodology must initiate the pipeline 
listing process within three years of the project start date and must complete validation within 
eight years of the project start date. 
6.3 
Determination of Baseline Scenario 
 
Step 1a. Identify credible alternative forest management scenarios to the proposed VCS project 
activity 
As per the applicability conditions, the project must demonstrate a baseline scenario that 
involves clear cut, patch cut, seed tree, continuous thinning or group selection forest 
management techniques, using evidence such as management plans, forest inventories, 
assessments by reputable forestry consultants, the common practice of alternative landowners 
and common practice in the region. Where it is not possible to demonstrate such a baseline, 
this methodology must not be applied. Baseline scenarios with no timber harvesting or 
management without a timber revenue objective must be excluded as per the methodology 
applicability conditions. Identify realistic and credible land-use scenarios that would have 
occurred on the land within the proposed project area in the absence of the IFM project activity 
under the VCS.2 The scenario must be feasible for the project proponents or similar project 
 
2 For example, continuation of the pre-project land use or a switch to land use typical for the region in which the planned 
IFM project is located, establishing agricultural plantation, tourist resort, hunting area/farm, utilizing regionally typical 
forms of funds investment or other economically attractive activities. 
 
VM0003, v1.3  
 
8 
 
proponents taking into account relevant national and/or sectoral policies3 and circumstances, 
such as historical land uses, practices and economic trends. The identified land-use scenario 
must be limited to forested land uses. This process must clearly identify barriers to and benefits 
of all potential scenarios. 
The possible land-use scenarios to be evaluated must include: 
1) Continuation of pre-project forest management (historical baseline); 
2) Legal requirements for forest management in the region (legal baseline); 
3) Common practice forest management in the region (common practice baseline); and 
4) Forest management as modeled under the project but in the absence of registration as 
an IFM project activity. 
For identifying realistic and credible land-use scenarios, land-use records, field surveys, data 
and feedback from stakeholders and information from other appropriate sources, including 
participatory rural appraisal (PRA)4 should be used as appropriate. All current land uses within 
the boundary of the proposed IFM project activity may be deemed realistic and credible.  
IFM project proponents must use the following guidelines to define these possible land-use 
scenarios. 
Guidance for Defining the Legal Baseline 
The legal baseline is defined by the forest management scenario that maximizes net present 
value to the forest owner(s) through timber harvesting while reflecting all legal requirements for 
forest management. In many cases, the specific management practices defined by the project 
proponent in the legal baseline may not be explicitly addressed in the relevant forest practices 
regulations, and the legality and plausibility of these practices must be confirmed by an 
independent forest consulting entity. 
Guidance for Defining the Common Practice Baseline 
Common practice in the project region must be defined by an independent forest consulting 
entity and must consider the following elements of forest management: 
1) Harvest rotations, 
 
3 Annex 3 to the report of the EB at its twenty-second meeting and Annex 19 to the report of the EB at its twenty-third 
meeting clarify how relevant national and/or sectoral policies should be taken into account during identification of a 
baseline scenario. Available at: https://cdm.unfccc.int/EB/022/eb22_repan3.pdf  and 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/EB/023/eb23_repan19.pdf 
4 Participatory rural appraisal (PRA) is an approach to the analysis of local problems and the formulation of tentative 
solutions with local stakeholders. It makes use of a wide range of visualization methods for group-based analysis to 
deal with spatial and temporal aspects of social and environmental problems. This methodology is described in 
Chambers, R. (1992). Rural appraisal: Rapid, relaxed, and participatory. Discussion Paper 311, Institute of 
Development Studies, and Theis, J., & Grady, H. (1991). Participatory rapid appraisal for community development. 
Save the Children Fund. 
 
VM0003, v1.3  
 
9 
 
2) Harvest methods, 
3) Species harvested and planted, 
4) No-harvest zones, 
5) Riparian management areas, 
6) Areas of steep slope or unstable soils, and/or 
7) Maximum patch cut areas. 
 
Step 1b. Selection of a single baseline forest management scenario 
IFM project proponents must evaluate the identified plausible baseline management systems 
relative to all of the following:  
1) A documented history of the operator (e.g., operator must have at least 20 years of 
management records to show normal historical practices). Common records to 
document history include data on timber cruise volumes, inventory levels or harvest 
levels on the property;  
2) The legal requirements for forest management and land use in the area; and 
3) A common practice standard among similar landowners in the area. 
In all cases these three scenarios must be described by the project proponent, then reviewed 
and approved as plausible and accurate by an independent forest consulting entity. 
Requirements for forest consultant qualifications will vary by region, however, the 
validation/verification body must consider the following elements when reviewing consultant 
qualifications: 
a) In regions where a legally recognized certified forester designation exists, the forest 
consulting entity must have that designation. 
b) In areas where there are no legal certified forester designations, the consultant must 
have either of the following: 
i) 
Accreditation under a widely recognized elective accreditation program that 
grants “certified forester” designation (e.g., Society of American Foresters); or 
ii) 
Publicly filed management plans or harvest plans that demonstrate the 
participation of the consulting entity and their qualifications to review the 
required documentation.  
The alternative land-use scenario that is not prevented by any barrier or is the most financially 
viable is identified as the baseline scenario.  
IFM project proponents must use the following guidelines to select the most plausible baseline 
scenario to be modeled. 
Historical Baseline 
 
VM0003, v1.3  
 
10 
 
The historical baseline must be selected as the most plausible baseline scenario where the 
following documents exist for the forest property: 
1) Historical records of forest management for 20 or more years preceding the project 
start date; 
2) Historical records that indicate that the management practices have surpassed the 
legal barriers provided by conforming with all local and regional forest legislation; and 
3) Historical records that indicate that the historical management does not surpass 
financial barriers as indicated by providing below average market returns.5 
Where these documents do not exist, the project must be developed using the legal or common 
practice baselines.  
Legal Baseline 
Where the historical baseline is not applicable based on the criteria above, the legal baseline 
must be selected as the most plausible baseline scenario where regulations of forest 
management practices exist and are readily enforced within the project region.  
An independent forest consulting entity must confirm that the practices defined in the legal 
baseline by the project proponent are plausible considering verifiable evidence. During 
validation, the forest consultant must share with the validation/verification body evidence for 
their determination of the plausibility of the legal baseline. Such evidence must in all situations 
be considered confidential and must not be published or shared by the validation/verification 
body. Such evidence may include, for example: management plans, records of timber sales or 
harvesting by the project proponent within the project area or in other properties under their 
control; management plans, records of timber sales or harvesting by other entities similar to 
the project proponent in the region; national or regional government statistics on forest 
management in the region; published data and analyses on forest management in the region; 
and/or spatial analyses on management options and/or carbon stocks in the focal region. As 
needed, the validation/verification body may consult additional independent forest consulting 
entities to verify the opinion provided by the independent forest consulting entity selected by 
the proponent and to determine that the legal baseline is plausible. 
Common Practice Baseline 
The common practice baseline must be selected as the most plausible baseline scenario where 
there is insufficient documentation to utilize the historical baseline and where forest 
management regulations do not exist or are not readily enforced in the project region.  
It is possible that the common practice baseline and project scenarios are the same, in which 
case the project scenario is not considered additional. 
 
5 Below average market returns are defined as 80 percent or less of the current prevailing internal rate of return for 
forestland investment in comparable forest types and locations, after considering the full array of timber, non-timber 
and ecosystem service net revenues associated with the property, averaged over the last five years. Forestland 
investment in comparable forest types and locations is defined as common practice management.   
 
VM0003, v1.3  
 
11 
 
During validation, the forest consultant must share with the validation/verification body 
evidence for their determination of common practice. Such evidence must in all situations be 
considered confidential and must not be published or shared by the validation/verification 
body. Such evidence may include, for example: management plans, records of timber sales or 
harvesting by the project proponent within the project area or in other properties under their 
control; management plans, records of timber sales or harvesting by other entities similar to 
the project proponent in the region; national or regional government statistics on forest 
management in the region; published data and analyses on forest management in the region; 
and/or spatial analyses on management options and/or carbon stocks in the region.