8 QUANTIFICATION OF GHG EMISSION 
REDUCTIONS AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
 General approach 
Emissions in the baseline scenario are attributed to carbon stock changes in biomass carbon 
pools, soil processes, or a combination of these. In addition, where relevant, emissions from 
fossil fuel use may be quantified. 
Emissions in the baseline scenario are estimated as: 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿= 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠+ 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙+ 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙
 
 
 
 
(18) 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠= −∑
∑
(
44
12
𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 × ∆𝐶𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠,𝑖,𝑡)
  
 
 
 
(19) 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠= ∑
∑
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 
 
 
 
 
 
(20) 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙= ∑
∑
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿−𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 
 
 
 
 
 
(21) 
Where: 
GHGBSL   
= Net CO2e emissions in the baseline scenario up to year t*; t CO2e 
GHGBSL-biomass 
= Net CO2e emissions from biomass carbon pools in the baseline scenario up to 
year t*; t CO2e 
GHGBSL-soil  
= Net CO2e emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario up to year t*; t  
 
  
CO2e 
GHGBSL-fuel 
= Net CO2e emissions from fossil fuel use in the baseline scenario up to year  
 
  
t*; t CO2e 
ΔCBSL-biomass,i,t 
= Net carbon stock changes in biomass carbon pools in the baseline scenario  
 
  
in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
GHGBSL-soil,i,t 
= GHG emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in  
 
  
year t; t CO2e yr-1 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
26 
GHGBSL-fuel,i,t 
= GHG emissions from fossil fuel use the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; 
 
tCO2e yr-1 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
 
Estimation of GHG emissions and removals related to the biomass pool is based on carbon 
stock changes. Estimation of GHG emissions and removals from the SOC pool is based on 
either various proxies (e.g., carbon stock change, water table depth) or through the use of 
literature, data, default factors or models. 
Assessing GHG emissions in the baseline scenario consists of determining GHG emission 
proxies/parameters and assessing their pre-project spatial distribution, constructing a time 
series of the chosen proxies/parameters for each stratum for the entire project crediting period 
and determining annual GHG emissions per stratum for the entire project crediting period. 
In order to project the future GHG emissions per unit area in each stratum for each projected 
verification date within the project crediting period under the baseline scenario, the project 
proponent must apply the latest version of VCS module VMD0019 Methods to Project Future 
Conditions.6 When applying Steps 13 and 14 of VMD0019 (version 1, issued 16 November 
2012, the version of the module current as of the writing of this methodology) the project 
proponent must use the guidance for sea level rise provided in Section 5.2 of this methodology. 
Four driving factors are likely to be relevant for GHG accounting in the baseline scenario, and 
are relevant for use of VMD0019. Each factor affects the evolution of the site over a 100-year 
period. These include: 
• 
Initial land use and development patterns 
• 
Initial infrastructure that impedes natural tidal hydrology 
• 
Natural plant succession for the physiographic region of the project 
• 
Climate variables as likely drivers of changes in tidal hydrology within the 100-year 
timeframe of the project, influencing sea level rise, precipitation and associated 
freshwater delivery 
 
Land use and development patterns – In order to derive trends in land use, assumptions about 
the likelihood of future development of the project area must be documented and considered in 
light of current zoning, regulatory constraints to development, proximity to urban areas or 
transportation infrastructure, and expected population growth, including how land would 
 
6 This module provides detailed procedures for assessing future trends in key variables that affect GHG emissions or removals. 
In the context of this methodology, this module is meant to assist in the assessment of these trends and does not necessarily 
replace procedures in this methodology. Procedures in the module must be used whenever relevant and may be justifiably 
simplified. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
27 
develop within and surrounding the project site and how such changes would change hydrologic 
conditions within the project area. Current development patterns and plausible future land use 
changes must be mapped to a scale sufficient to estimate GHG emissions from the baseline 
scenario. Particular attention must be paid to existing or future construction of barriers to tidal 
and/or river hydrology and sediment supply from rivers and/or along the coast, as well as 
barriers that will impair wetland capacity to migrate landwards with sea level rise. In the case of 
abandonment of pre-project land use in the baseline scenario, the project proponent must 
consider non-human induced hydrologic changes brought about by collapsing dikes or ditches 
that would have naturally closed over time, and progressive subsidence, leading to rising 
relative water levels, increasingly thinner aerobic layers and reduced CO2 emission rates. 
Infrastructure impediments to tidal hydrology – In order to derive trends in tidal wetland 
evolution, the baseline scenario must take into account the current and historic layout of any 
tidal barriers and drainage systems. The tidal barriers and drainage layout at the start of the 
project activity must be mapped at scale (1:10,000 or any other scale justified for estimating 
water table depths throughout the project area). Historic tidal barriers and drainage layout must 
be mapped using topographic and/or hydrological maps from (if available) the start of the 
major hydrological impacts but covering at least the 20 years prior to the project start date. 
Historic drainage structures (collapsed ditches) may (still) have higher hydraulic conductivity 
than the surrounding areas and function as preferential flow paths. Historic tidal barriers 
(agricultural dikes and levees) may constrain the tidal flows and prevent natural sedimentation 
patterns. The effect of historic tidal barriers and drainage structures on current hydrological 
functioning of the project area must be assessed on the basis of quantitative hydrological 
modeling and/or expert judgment. 
Historic information on the pre-existing channel network as determined by aerial photography 
may serve to set trends in post-project dendritic channel formation in the field. Derivation of 
such trends must be performed on the basis of hydrologic modeling using the total tidal 
volume, soil erodibility and/or expert judgment. With respect to hydrological functioning, the 
baseline scenario must be restricted by climate variables and quantify any impacts on the 
hydrological functioning as caused by planned measures outside the project area (e.g., dam 
construction or further changes in hydrology such as culverts), by demonstrating a hydrological 
connection to the planned measures. 
Natural plant succession - Based on the assessment of changes in water table depth, a time 
series of vegetation composition must be derived ex ante, based on vegetation succession 
schemes in the baseline scenario from scientific literature or expert judgment. For example, 
diked agricultural land will undergo natural plant succession to forests, freshwater wetlands, 
tidal wetlands, rank uplands, or open water based on the scenario’s land use trajectory, 
inundation scenario, proximity to native or invasive seed sources, plant succession trajectories 
of adjacent natural areas or likely maintenance consistent with projected future human land 
use (e.g., pasture, lawn, landscaping). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
28 
Climate variables – Consistent with the sea level rise guidance provided in Section 5.2 above, 
areas of inundation and erosion within the project area must be considered in relation to the 
above three factors. Expected changes in freshwater delivery associated with changes in 
rainfall patterns must be considered, including expected human responses to these changes. 
The project proponent must, for the duration of the project crediting period, reassess the 
baseline scenario every 10 years. Based on the reassessment criteria specified in Section 6 
above, the revised baseline scenario must be incorporated into revised estimates of baseline 
emissions. This baseline reassessment must include the evaluation of the validity of proxies for 
GHG emissions. 
 Accounting for sea level rise 
The consequences of submergence of a given stratum due to sea level rise are:  
1) Carbon stocks from aboveground biomass are lost to oxidation, and  
2) Depending upon the geomorphic setting, soil carbon stocks may be held intact or be eroded 
and transported beyond the project area. 
For strata where conversion to open water is expected before t = 100, the maximum quantity of 
GHG emission reductions that may be claimed by the project must be calculated as defined in 
Section 8.5.1. 
Regarding (1) above, where biomass is submerged, it is assumed that this carbon is 
immediately and entirely returned to the atmosphere. For such strata: 
ΔCBSL-agbiomass,i,t = 12/44 × (CBSL-agbiomass,i,t – CBSL-agbiomass,i,(t-T)) / T
  
 
 
(22) 
For the year of submergence: 
CBSL-agbiomass,i,t = 0 
Where: 
ΔCBSL-agbiomass,i,t 
= Net carbon stock change in aboveground biomass carbon pools in the baseline 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
CBSL-agbiomass,i,t 
= Carbon stock in aboveground biomass in the baseline scenario in stratum i  
 
  
in year t (from the aboveground biomass components in CTREE_BSL,t and  
 
  
CSHRUB_BSL,t in AR-Tool14 and CBSL-herb,i,t); t CO2e 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
T 
  
= Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 – t1) 
The gradual loss of vegetation in the project area due to submergence may be captured by 
detailed stratification into areas with and without vegetation. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
29 
Regarding (2) above, the project proponent must assess the time and rate of submergence of 
the project area.  
For areas that drown out while the area of ponds increases, the loss of SOC may be assumed to 
be insignificant. It is assumed that, upon submergence, soil carbon is not returned to the 
atmosphere unless site-specific scientific justification is provided. 
In areas with wave action, sediment will erode, and carbon will be removed. Assuming that all 
carbon is re-sedimented and stored (and not oxidized) is conservative. Procedure for CO2 
emissions from eroded soil are provided in Section 8.1.4.3. 
Restoration projects may be designed in such a way that they have advantages over the 
baseline scenario in one or more of the following ways, as must be quantified and justified in 
the project description:  
• 
The point in time when submergence and erosion sets off.  
• 
The amount of carbon that erodes upon submergence.  
• 
The oxidation rate of eroded soil organic matter. In the most conservative approach, the 
oxidation constant is 0 for the baseline and 1 for the project scenario. 
 Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in baseline scenario  
Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in the baseline scenario are estimated as: 
ΔCBSL-biomass,i,t = ΔCBSL-tree/shrub,i,t + ΔCBSL-herb,i,t  
 
 
 
 
 
(23) 
Where: 
ΔCBSL-biomass,i,t 
= Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in the baseline scenario in  
 
  
stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
ΔCBSL-tree/shrub,i,t = Net carbon stock change in tree and shrub carbon pools in the baseline  
 
  
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
ΔCBSL-herb,i,t 
= Net carbon stock change in herb carbon pools in the baseline scenario in  
 
  
stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
Trees and shrubs 
Net carbon stock change in trees and shrubs in the baseline scenario are estimated by applying 
the latest version of CDM tool AR-Tool14 Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks 
of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM project activities, noting that: 
1) AR-Tool14 is only used to derive net carbon stock changes in tree and shrub carbon pools 
(ΔCBSL-tree/shrub,i,t), and 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
30 
2) The following equation applies: 
ΔCBSL-tree/shrub,i,t = 12/44 × (ΔCTREE_BSL,t + ΔCSHRUB_BSL,t) 
 
 
 
(24) 
Where: 
ΔCBSL-tree/shrub,i,t = Net carbon stock changes in tree and shrub carbon pools in the baseline 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
ΔCTREE_BSL,t  
= Change in carbon stock in baseline tree biomass within the project area in  
  
 year t; t CO2-e yr-1 (derived from application of AR-Tool14; calculations are  
  
done for each stratum i) 
ΔCSHRUB_BSL,t  
= Change in carbon stock in baseline shrub biomass within the project area in  
  
year t; t CO2-e yr-1 (derived from application of AR-Tool14; calculations are done 
for each stratum i) 
 
For strata where reforestation or revegetation activities in the baseline scenario include 
harvesting, the long-term average of CTREE_BSL,t in AR-Tool14 must be calculated as specified in 
Section 8.2.3. 
 
Herbaceous vegetation 
Net carbon stock change in herbaceous vegetation in the baseline scenario is estimated using 
a carbon stock change approach as follows: 
ΔCBSL-herb,i,t = (CBSL-herb,i,t – CBSL-herb,i,,(t-T)) / T
 
 
 
 
 
 
(25) 
Where: 
ΔCBSL-herb,i,t 
= Net carbon stock change in herbaceous vegetation carbon pools in the 
baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
CBSL-herb,i,t  
= Carbon stock in herbaceous vegetation in the baseline scenario in stratum i in   
 
  
year t; t C 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3 … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
T 
  
= Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 – t1) 
 
A default factor7 for carbon stock in herbaceous vegetation of 3 t C ha-1 may be applied for 
strata with 100% herbaceous cover. For areas with a vegetation cover <100%, a 1:1 
relationship between vegetation cover and carbon stock must be applied. The default factor 
may be claimed only for the first year of the project crediting period as herbaceous biomass 
 
7 Calculated from peak aboveground biomass data from 20 sites summarized in Mitsch & Gosselink. The median of these 
studies is 1.3 kg d.m. m-2. This was converted to the default factor value as follows: 1.3 × 0.45 × 0.5. The factor 0.45 converts 
organic matter mass to carbon mass; the factor 0.5 is a factor that averages annual peak biomass (factor = 1) and annual 
minimum biomass (factor = 0, assuming ephemeral aboveground biomass and complete litter decomposition). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
31 
quickly reaches a steady state. Vegetation cover must be determined by commonly used 
techniques in field biology. Procedures for measuring carbon stocks in herbaceous vegetation 
are provided in Section 9.3.6. The above default factor may not be applied in case AR-Tool14 is 
used. 
Where a carbon stock increase in herbaceous vegetation is quantified in the project scenario, 
carbon stock changes must also be quantified in the baseline scenario; where a carbon stock 
decline is quantified in the baseline scenario, carbon stock changes must also be quantified in 
the project scenario. 
 Net GHG emissions from soil in baseline scenario  
 General 
Net GHG emissions from soil in the baseline scenario are estimated as: 
GHGBSL-soil,i,t = Ai,t × (GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t - Deductionalloch + GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t + GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t)   (26) 
For organic soils where t > tPDT-BSL,i:  GHGBSL-soil,i,t = 0 
For mineral soils where t > tSDT-BSL,i:  GHGBSL-soil,i,t = 0 
Where: 
GHGBSL-soil,i,t 
= GHG emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in  
 
 
year t; t CO2e yr-1 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t  = CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in  
 
 
year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
Deductionalloch 
= Deduction from CO2 emissions from the SOC pool to account for the  
 
 
percentage of the carbon stock that is derived from allochthonous soil  
 
 
organic carbon; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t  = CH4 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in  
 
 
year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t   = N2O emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in  
 
 
year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
Ai,t 
 
= Area of stratum i in year t; ha 
tPDT-BSL,i  
= Peat depletion time in the baseline scenario in stratum i in years elapsed  
 
 
since the project start date; yr 
tSDT-BSL,i  
= Soil organic carbon depletion time in the baseline scenario in stratum i in  
 
 
years elapsed since the project start date; yr 
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
 
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
 
CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario may occur in situ or indirectly 
following soil erosion or exposure to an aerobic environment through excavation as defined in 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
32 
Equation 27. For strata with in-situ emissions (with or without drainage), follow procedures in 
Section 8.1.4.2. For strata where soil erosion occurs, procedures in Section 8.1.4.3 must be 
used. For strata where soil is exposed to an aerobic environment through excavation, 
procedures in Section 8.1.4.4 must be used. For strata with in-situ emissions, CH4 and N2O 
emissions may be conservatively set to zero or may be estimated using procedures in Sections 
8.1.4.5 and 8.1.4.6, respectively. For strata where soil erosion occurs, or soil is exposed to an 
aerobic environment through excavation or drainage, CH4 and N2O emissions are conservatively 
set to zero. 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t = GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t + GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t + GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t 
 
(27) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t  
CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in 
year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t  
CO2 emissions from the SOC pool of in-situ soils in the baseline scenario in 
stratum i in year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t 
CO2 emissions from the eroded SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum 
i in year t ; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t 
CO2 emissions from the SOC pool of soil exposed to an aerobic environment 
through excavation in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; t CO2e ha-1 
yr-1 
GHG emissions from disturbed carbon stocks in stockpiles (originating from piling, dredging, 
channelization) exposed to aerobic decomposition must be accounted for in the baseline 
scenario. Such stockpiles must be identified in the stratification of the project area and 
accounting procedures provided in this Section 8.1.4 must be used. 
The baseline scenario may involve the construction of levees to constrain flow and flooding 
patterns, the construction of dams to hold water, and/or upstream changes in land surface 
leading to intensified run-off. In such cases, the project proponent must account for 
hydrological processes that lead to increased carbon burial and GHG reductions within the 
project area using procedures provided in this section.  
The sub-sections below provide guidance with respect to the methods which may be used to 
estimate net GHG emissions from soil in the baseline scenario. Project proponents may choose 
the method that is most suitable to their project circumstances and data availability. However, 
default factors and emissions factors cannot be used in the presence of published data 
suitable for use in the project area. 
Use of proxies 
Proxies (as defined in VCS document Program Definitions) may be used to derive values of GHG 
emissions. The project proponent must demonstrate that such proxies are strongly correlated 
with the value of interest and that they can serve as an equivalent or better method (e.g., in 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
33 
terms of reliability, consistency or practicality) to determine the value of interest than direct 
measurement of the value itself. Such proxies must also have been developed and tested for 
use in systems that are in the same or similar region as the project area, share similar 
geomorphic, hydrologic, and biological properties, and are under similar management regimes, 
unless any differences should not have a substantial effect on GHG emissions. 
Use of models 
The project proponent may apply deterministic models (models as defined in VCS document 
Program Definitions) to derive values of GHG emissions. In addition to the VCS requirements for 
selection and use of models, modeled GHG emissions and removals must have been validated 
with direct measurements from a system with the same or similar water table depth and 
dynamics, salinity, tidal hydrology, sediment supply and plant community type as the project 
area. 
Use of published data 
Peer-reviewed published data or scientific reports that have been scrutinized under the rules 
for expert judgment (Section 9.3.3) may be used to generate values for GHG emissions in the 
same or similar systems as those in the project area. Such data must be limited to systems that 
are in the same or similar region as the project area, share similar geomorphic, hydrologic, and 
biological properties, and are under similar management regimes unless any differences 
should not have a substantial effect on GHG emissions. 
Use of default factors 
Emission factors must be derived from peer-reviewed literature and must be appropriate to 
ecosystem type and conditions and the geographic region of the project area. 
The default factors in Sections 8.1.4.2.3, 8.1.4.5.4, and 8.1.4.6.4 are subject to periodic re-
assessment per the requirements for periodic assessment of default factors set out in VCS 
document Methodology Development and Review Process. 
IPCC default factors8 may be used as indicated in this methodology. Tier 1 values may be used, 
where relevant indicated in the procedures below, but their use must be justified as appropriate 
for project conditions. 
 CO2 emissions from soil – in situ 
CO2 emissions from in-situ soil exposed to an aerobic environment through drainage (GHGBSL-
insitu-CO2,i,t) may be calculated directly or may be calculated from estimates of the initial amount 
of carbon that is exposed (CBSL-soil,i,t) and the percentage of the exposed carbon that is returned 
to the atmosphere (C%BSL-emitted,i,t) as defined in Equation 28.  
 
8 2013 Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines: Wetlands 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
34 
Estimates of CBSL-soil,i,t or C%BSL-emitted,i, following aerobic exposure based on the extrapolation of 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t  over the project crediting period must account for tendency of organic carbon 
concentrations to approach steady-state equilibrium in mineral soils. For this reason, a 
complete loss of soil organic carbon may not occur in mineral soils. Likewise, C%BSL-emitted,i, may 
not reach 100%. This steady-state equilibrium must be determined conservatively, e.g. by 
assuming that CBSL-soil,i,t at steady state will be zero or that C%BSL-emitted,i, will be 100%. In case of 
alternating mineral and organic horizons that are exposed, CO2 emissions must be determined 
for all individual horizons. 
CO2 emissions from soils may be estimated using:  
1) Proxies 
2) Published values 
3) Default factors 
4) Models 
5) Field-collected data, or  
6) Historical or chronosequence-derived data 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t = 44/12 × CBSL-soil,i,t × C%BSL-emitted,i,t / 100 
 
 
 
(28) 
CBSL-soil,i,t = C%BSL-soil,i,t × BD × Depth_iBSL,i,t x 10 
 
 
 
 
 
(29) 
 
Where: 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t 
= CO2 emissions from the in-situ SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i 
in year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
CBSL-soil,i,t 
= Soil organic carbon stock in in-situ soil material in the baseline scenario in 
stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t 
= Organic carbon loss due to oxidation, as a percentage of C mass present in 
in-situ soil material in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; % 
C%BSL-soil,i,t 
= Percentage of carbon of in-situ soil material in the baseline scenario in 
stratum i in year t; % 
BD 
 
= Soil bulk density; kg m-3  
Depth_iBSL,i,t 
= Depth of the in-situ exposed soil in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year 
t; m 
In certain cases, allochthonous soil organic carbon may accumulate in the project area. 
Procedures for the estimation of a compensation factor for allochthonous soil organic carbon 
are specified in Section 8.1.4.2.7. 
8.1.4.2.1 
Proxy-based approach 
CO2 emissions may be estimated using proxies such as water table depth and soil subsidence 
(where such proxies meet the guidance in Section 8.1.4.1 above). Carbon stock change, as a 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
35 
proxy for CO2 emissions or removals, is dealt with in Section 8.1.4.2.5. Where the project 
proponent uses a proxy, such emissions are represented by the following equation: 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t = ƒ (GHG emission proxy)
 
 
 
 
 
 
(30) 
Water table depth 
Water table depth may be used as a proxy for CO2 emissions for mineral and organic soils 
where the project proponent is able to justify their use as described in Section 8.1.4.1.  
When using water table depth as a proxy, it must be projected for the 10-year baseline period 
through hydrologic modeling, taking into consideration the following: 
• 
Long-term average climate variables (over 20+ years prior to the project start date from 
two climate stations nearest to the project area) influencing water levels and the timing 
and quantity of water flow; 
• 
Planned water management activities documented in existing land management plans, 
predating consideration of the proposed project activity; and 
• 
Potential offsite influences (e.g., changes in sedimentation rates, upstream water 
supply, sea level rise). 
If the mean annual water table depth in the project area exceeds the depth range for which the 
emission-water table depth relationship determined for the project is valid, a conservative 
extrapolation must be used. 
Subsidence 
Soil subsidence may also be used as a proxy for CO2 emissions from the SOC pool, using the 
equation below: 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t = 44/12 × Cpeatloss-BSL,i,t  
 
 
 
 
 
(31) 
Cpeatloss-BSL,i,t = 10 × Ratesubs-BSL,i x VC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(32) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t  = CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year 
t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
Cpeatloss-BSL,i,t 
= Soil organic carbon loss due to subsidence in the baseline scenario in 
subsidence stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 
Ratesubs-BSL,i 
= Rate of organic soil loss due to subsidence in the baseline scenario in stratum 
i; m yr-1 
VC 
 
= Volumetric organic carbon content of organic soil; kg C m-3 
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL subsidence strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
 
= 1, 2, 3 … t* years elapsed since the start of the project activity 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
36 
8.1.4.2.2 
Published values 
Peer-reviewed published data may be used to generate a value for GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t , CBSL-soil,i,t , 
C%BSL-emiitted,i,t , C%BSL-soil,i,t , BD or Depth, based on values from the same or similar systems as 
those in the project area, based on the guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1 above. 
8.1.4.2.3 
Default factors  
For tidal marsh and mangrove systems, a default factor for GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t may be used in the 
absence of data suitable for using the published value approach, using the value provided 
below: 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t = -1.46(9) t C ha-1 yr-1
 
× 44/12  
 
 
 
 
(33) 
The above default factor may only be applied to areas with a crown or vegetation cover of at 
least 50%. By contrast, for areas with a crown or vegetation cover of less than 15%, this SOC 
accumulation is assumed to be insignificant and accounted for as zero. For areas with a crown 
or vegetation cover between 15 and 50%, a linear interpolation may be applied. 
When using this default factor, a deduction for allochthonous carbon must be applied as per 
Section 8.1.4.2.7. 
In the absence of data suitable for using the published value approach, the most recently 
published IPCC emission factors10 may be used to estimate CO2 emissions from the SOC pool, 
except for tidal marsh and mangrove systems. 
A default factor may be used for mineral soils for the percent carbon at a steady-state 
equilibrium attained 20 years following exposure to an aerobic environment in the absence of 
data suitable for using the published value approach, i.e., at steady state: 
C%BSL-soil,i,t = C%BSL-soil,i,t20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(34) 
Where: 
C%BSL-soil,i,t 
= Percentage of carbon of in-situ soil material in stratum i in year t; % 
C%BSL-soil,i,t20  = Percentage of carbon in in-situ soil material at steady-state equilibrium 20 years 
following exposure to an aerobic environment in stratum i in year 20; % 
 
9 (within Equation 34) This default factor was derived from the median rate of the literature synthesis of Chmura et al. 2003. 
The synthesis included studies worldwide, including marshes and mangroves. The median was used as the best estimate of 
central tendency because the data were not normally distributed. 
10 2013 Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines: Wetlands 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
37 
The project proponent may assume that percent carbon declines from the initial value (C%BSL-
soil,i,t0) (derived through field data collection, or other methods in this section) to the following 
default steady-state equilibrium at a linear rate over a twenty year period following exposure.  
C%BSL-soil,i,t20 = 1.6 %  (11)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(35) 
The project proponent may justify a lower percent carbon steady state for the baseline scenario 
based on appropriate scientific research. 
8.1.4.2.4 
Modeling 
A peer-reviewed published model may be used to generate a value of GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t , CBSL-
soil,i,t , C%BSL-emitted,i,t,, C%BSL-soil,i,t , BD or Depth in the same or similar systems as those in the 
project area based on the guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1 above. 
8.1.4.2.5 
Field-collected data 
Soil coring may be used to generate a value of CBSL-soil,i,t, C%BSL-soil,i,t , BD or Depth as outlined in 
Section 9.3.7. For the baseline scenario, soil cores must be collected within 2 years prior to the 
project start date. Where the project proponent uses an installed reference plane for the 
baseline scenario, it must have been installed at least 4 years prior to the baseline 
measurement, which is good practice to ensure that a reliable average accumulation rate is 
obtained. 
Carbon stock change based on field-collected data is calculated using the following equation: 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t = 44/12 × –(CBSL-soil,i,t – CBSL-soil,i,,(t-T)) / T
  
 
 
 
(36) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-soil-CO2,i,t  = CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year 
t; t CO2e yr-1 
CBSL-soil,i,t 
= Soil organic carbon stock in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; t C ha1 
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
 
= 1, 2, 3 … t* years elapsed since the start of the project activity 
T 
 
= Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 – t1) 
8.1.4.2.6 
Historical data or chronosequences 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t , CBSL-soil,i,t , C%BSL-emitted,i,t , BD or Depth in the baseline scenario may be 
estimated using either historical data collected from the project area or chronosequence data 
collected at similar sites. Refer to the instructions in Section 8.1.4.1. 
 
11 This is the mean value of resampled cultivated and drained mineral soils (from Table 2 in David et al. 2009). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
38 
As an example, the rate of soil organic carbon loss due to oxidation in the baseline scenario 
from mineral soils (RateCloss-BSL) may be estimated using either historical data collected from the 
project area (as described in Section 9.3.7) or chronosequence data collected at similar sites 
(as described in Section 8.1.4.1). Refer also to the instructions in Section Error! Reference 
source not found.. CO2 emissions from the SOC pool are then calculated as follows: 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t = RateCloss-BSL,i,t
 
× 44/12 
 
 
 
 
 
(37) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t  = CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in 
year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
RateCloss-BSL,i,t 
= Rate of organic carbon loss12 in mineral soil due to oxidation in the baseline 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 yr-1.  
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
 
= 1, 2, 3 … t* years elapsed since the start of the project activity 
Alternatively, Equation 36 may be used. 
8.1.4.2.7 
Deduction for allochthonous carbon 
A deduction from the estimate of CO2 emissions from the SOC pool must be applied to account 
for the percentage of sequestration resulting from allochthonous soil organic carbon 
accumulation. A deduction must not be used if the approach used above to estimate CO2 
emissions directly estimates autochthonous CO2 emissions or otherwise accounts for 
allochthonous carbon. 
Deductionalloch = GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t × (%Calloch /100)13 
 
 
 
 
(38) 
 
Where: 
Deductionalloch 
Deduction from CO2 sequestration in the SOC pool to account for the 
percentage of the carbon stock that is derived from allochthonous soil organic 
carbon; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t  CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year 
t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
%Calloch   
Percentage of the total soil organic carbon that is allochthonous; % 
i 
 
1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
t 
 
1, 2, 3 … t* years elapsed since the start of the project activity 
 
12 Note that this is the same as a negative carbon sequestration. 
13 Estimation may be made for total or recalcitrant allochthonous carbon. This equation only applies if GHGBSL-insitu-CO2,i,t is 
negative (sequestration). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
39 
Deductionalloch       may be conservatively set to zero in the baseline scenario. 
For strata with organic soils or seagrass systems14, Deductionalloch = 0. 
%Calloch may be estimated using either: 
1) Published values  
2) Field-collected data 
3) Modeling 
Published values 
Peer-reviewed published data may be used to generate a value of the percentage of 
allochthonous soil organic carbon in the same or similar systems as those in the project area 
based on the guidelines described in Section 8.1.4.1. 
For example, Needelman et al. (2018) provide a value for the percentage of the total soil 
organic carbon that is allochthonous (%Calloch) based on the percentage soil carbon, which can 
be used for marshes and mangroves with mineral soils. 
Field-collected data 
For this method, the allochthonous carbon percentage is estimated using default values (listed 
below) and measured through analysis of field-collected soil cores (for soil carbon or organic 
matter), sediment tiles (for deposited sediment carbon or organic matter), or through collection 
of suspended sediments in tidal channels or sediments deposits in tidal flats (for sediment 
carbon or organic matter). 
For the following equation, %Csoil may be measured directly or derived from %OMsoil using the 
equations in Section 9.3.7. %Cautoch is derived from %OMautoch (defined below) using the 
equations in Section 9.3.7. 
%Calloch = 100 × (%Csoil - %Cautoch) / %Csoil 
 
 
 
 
 
(39) 
Where: 
%Calloch  
 
= Percentage of the total soil organic carbon that is allochthonous; % 
%Csoil 
 
 
= Percentage of soil that is organic carbon; % 
%Cautoch  
 
= Percentage of soil that is autochthonous organic carbon; % 
For the following equation, %OMsoil may be estimated directly using loss-on-ignition (LOI) data or 
indirectly from %Csoil using the equations below. %OMdepsed may be estimated directly using 
 
14 For seagrass systems, this zero deduction may only be used when the ‘layer with soil organic carbon indistinguishable from 
the baseline SOC concentration’ method is used with field-collected data on carbon stock changes (Duarte 2013, Greinier et 
al. 2013) 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
40 
loss-on-ignition (LOI) data, indirectly from %OMsoil using the equations below, or by using the 
default value given below. 
%OMautoch = (%OMsoil - %OMdepsed) / (1 - (%OMdepsed / 100)) 
 
 
 
(40) 
Where: 
%OMautoch  
= Percentage of soil that is autochthonous organic matter; % 
%OMdepsed  
= Percentage of deposited sediment that is organic matter; % 
%OMsoil  
 
= Percentage of soil that is soil organic matter; % 
The following equations may be used to derive %OMsoil from %Csoil and %OMdepsed from %Cdepsed, 
respectively. Alternatively, an equation developed using site-specific data may be used or an 
equation from peer-reviewed literature may be used if the equation represents soils from the 
same or similar systems as those in the project area.  
For marsh soils15: 
%OMsoil = (−0.4 + √(0.42 + 4 × 0.0025 × %Csoil)/(2 × 0.0025)
 
 
 
(41) 
%OMdepsed = (−0.4 + √(0.42 + 4 × 0.0025 × %Cdepsed)/(2 × 0.0025)
  
 
(42) 
For mangrove soils16: 
%OMsoil = (%Csoil – 2.8857) / 0.415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(43) 
%OMdepsed = (%Cdepsed – 2.8857) / 0.415 
 
 
 
 
 
(44) 
For seagrass soils with %OM < 20%17: 
%OMsoil = (%Csoil + 0.21) / 0.4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(45) 
%OMdepsed = (%Cdepsed + 0.21) / 0.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(46) 
Where: 
 
%Csoil 
 
= Percentage of soil that is organic carbon; % 
 
%Cdepsed 
= Percentage of deposited sediment that is organic C; % 
In all cases, the following default factor may be used for the determination of %OMdepsed: 
%OMdepsed = 1.5  18 
 
15 Craft et al. 1991 
16 Kauffman et al. 2011, Howard et al. 2014 
17 Fourqurean et al. 2012 as summarized in Howard et al. 2014 
18 Mayer 1994 Figure 4 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
41 
Alternatively, %Cdepsed may be calculated as 19: 
%Cdepsed = 0.086 × SA + 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(47) 
Where: 
SA 
 
= Average Surface Area of the sediment; m2g-1 
Modeling 
A quantitative model may be used to estimate the percent of allochthonous soil organic carbon 
where such model meets the guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1 above. The modeled percentage 
allochthonous soil organic carbon must be verified with direct measurements from a system 
with similar water table depth and dynamics, salinity and plant community type as the project 
area. The model must be accepted by the scientific community as shown by publication in a 
peer-reviewed journal and repeated application to different wetland systems. 
 CO2 Emissions from Eroded Soil 
For each stratum i at time t the project proponent must determine if soil erosion occurs. 
CO2 emissions from eroded soil material (GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t) may be calculated directly or may 
be calculated from estimates of the amount of carbon that is eroded (CBSL-eroded,i,t) and the 
percentage of the eroded carbon that is returned to the atmosphere (C%BSL-emitted,i,t). 
Project proponents can use any combination of the following methods to calculate these terms:  
1) Proxies 
2) Published values 
3) Default factors 
4) Models 
5) Field-collected data, or 
6) Historical or chronosequence-derived data 
GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t = 44/12 × CBSL-eroded,i,t × C%BSL-emitted,i,t / 100  
 
 
(48) 
CBSL-eroded,i,t = C%BSL-eroded,i,t × BD × Depth_eBSL,i,t x 10 
 
 
 
 
(49) 
Where: 
 
19 Mayer 1994 Figure 4 and surface area laboratory procedures 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
42 
GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t 
= CO2 emissions from the eroded SOC pool in the baseline scenario in 
stratum i in year t ; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
CBSL-eroded,i,t 
= Soil organic carbon stock in eroded soil material in the baseline scenario 
in stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t 
= Organic carbon loss due to oxidation, as a percentage of C mass present in 
eroded soil material in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t (20); % 
C%BSL-eroded,i,t 
= Percentage of carbon of soil material eroded in the baseline scenario; % 
BD 
 
= Soil bulk density; kg m-3  
Depth_eBSL,i,t 
= Depth of the eroded area from the surface to the surface prior to erosion 
in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; m 
8.1.4.3.1 
Proxy-based approach 
CO2 emissions from eroded soil may be estimated using proxies (where such proxies meet the 
guidance in Section 8.1.4.1). Where the project proponent uses a proxy, such emissions are 
represented by the following equation: 
GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t = ƒ (GHG emission proxy)
 
 
 
 
 
 
(50) 
8.1.4.3.2 
Published values 
Peer-reviewed published data may be used to generate a value for GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t , CBSL-
eroded,i,t , C%BSL-emiitted,i,t , C%BSL-eroded,i,t , BD or Depth, based on values from same or similar 
systems as those in the project area, based on the guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1.  
8.1.4.3.3 
Default factors  
For tidal marsh and mangrove systems, a default factor may be used in the absence of data 
suitable for using the published value approach, using the values provided below for the 
specified carbon preservation depositional environment (CPDE) as defined in Chapter 3: 
If there is connectivity between the eroded area and a river-estuary system:21 22 
If CPDE is “Normal Marine” or “Deltaic fluidized muds”, then C%BSL-emitted,i,t = 80% 
(51) 
If CPDE is “O2 depletion”, then C%BSL-emitted,i,t = 53% 
 
 
 
 
(52) 
 
20  
To ensure a conservative outcome, emissions must be estimated for a 5-year time period following the initial year of 
erosion. 
21  
Connectivity occurs when eroded carbon is delivered into river-estuary systems that transport materials seaward by 
continual resuspension, coastal margins and embayments with sufficient wave energy to continually re-suspend 
sediments into an aerobic water column, or subaquatic environments with low organic carbon content and course-
grained sediments that maintain aerobic conditions in the upper soil profile. 
22  
Values below are from Blair and Aller 2012 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
43 
If CPDE is “Small Mountainous Rivers”, then C%BSL-emitted,i,t = 39% 
 
 
(53) 
If CPDE is “Extreme accumulation rates”, then C%BSL-emitted,i,t = 49% 
 
 
(54) 
If there is no connectivity between the eroded area and a river-estuary system or the open sea  
and erosion mass is greater in the baseline scenario than the project scenario, then it is 
conservative to assume net zero emissions from eroded strata in the baseline scenario and the 
project scenario. 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t = 0% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(55) 
If there is no connectivity between the eroded area and a river-estuary system or the open sea 
and erosion mass is the same or lower in the baseline scenario than the project scenario, then 
it is conservative to assume 100% emissions from eroded strata in the baseline scenario and 
the project scenario. The value in Equation 55 above is then 100%. 
For both connected and non-connected systems, the project proponent may justify a greater 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t for the baseline scenario based on appropriate scientific research. In cases where 
erosion rates are lower in the project scenario than the baseline scenario and carbon fate is 
expected to be similar in both scenarios, this greater value of C%BSL-emitted,i,t must also be used 
for C%WPS-emitted,i,t. 
Normal Marine CPDE with data showing very low sediment accumulation rates (less than 0.002 
g cm-2 yr-1) may use a C%BSL-emitted,i,t value of 98.5%23.  
8.1.4.3.4 
Modeling 
A peer-reviewed published model may be used to generate a value of GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t , CBSL-
eroded,i,t , C%BSL-emitted,i,t , C%BSL-eroded,i,t , BD or Depth, in the same or similar systems as those in 
the project area based on the guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1. 
8.1.4.3.5 
Field-collected data 
Soil coring may be used to generate a value of CBSL-eroded,i,t , C%BSL-eroded,i,t , Depth or BD as 
outlined in Section 9.3.7. For the baseline scenario, soil cores must be collected within 2 years 
prior to the project start date. Where the project proponent uses an installed reference plane 
for the baseline scenario, it must have been installed at least 4 years prior to the project start 
date, which is good practice to ensure that a reliable average accumulation rate is obtained. 
 
23 Mean value from figure 9 in Blair and Aller 2012 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
44 
8.1.4.3.6 
Historical data or chronosequences 
GHGBSL-eroded-CO2,i,t , CBSL-eroded,i,t , C%BSL-emiitted,i,t , C%BSL-eroded,i,t , BD or Depth in the baseline 
scenario may be estimated using either historical data collected from the project area or 
chronosequence data collected at similar sites. Refer also to the instructions in Section 8.1.4.1.  
 CO2 Emissions from Soil Exposed to an Aerobic Environment Through Excavation 
For each stratum i at time t the project proponent must determine if piled-up soil24 exposed to 
an aerobic environment exists within the project boundary. 
CO2 emissions from soil exposed to an aerobic environment through excavation (GHGBSL-excav-
CO2,i,t) may be calculated directly or may be calculated from estimates of the initial amount of 
carbon that is exposed (CBSL-excav,i,t) and the percentage of the exposed carbon that is returned 
to the atmosphere (C%BSL-emitted,i,t) as defined in Equation 56.  
Estimates of CBSL-excav,i,t following the aerobic exposure event based on the extrapolation of 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t  over the project crediting period must account for tendency of organic carbon 
concentrations to approach steady-state equilibrium in mineral soils. For this reason, a 
complete loss of soil organic carbon may not occur in mineral soils. This steady-state 
equilibrium must be determined conservatively. 
Project proponents can use any combination of the following methods to calculate these terms:  
1) Proxies 
2) Published values 
3) Default factors 
4) Models 
5) Field-collected data, or 
6) Historical or chronosequence-derived data 
GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t = 44/12 × CBSL-excav,i,t × C%BSL-emitted,i,t / 100 
 
 
 
(56) 
CBSL-excav,i,t = C%BSL-excav,i,t × BD × Depth_exBSL,i,t × 10 
 
 
 
 
(57) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t 
= CO2 emissions from the SOC pool of soil exposed to an aerobic 
environment through excavation in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year 
t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
CBSL-excav,i,t 
= Soil organic carbon stock in soil exposed to an aerobic environment 
through excavation in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; t C ha-1 
 
24 “Piled up soil” refers to a body of soil material accumulated in piles or layers as a result of excavation. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
45 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t 
= Organic carbon loss due to oxidation, as a percentage of C mass present in 
excavated soil material in the baseline scenario in stratum i in year t; % 
C%BSL-excav,i,t 
= Percentage of carbon of soil material excavated in the baseline scenario; 
%  
BD 
 
= Soil bulk density; kg m-3  
Depth_exBSL,i,t 
= Depth of the piled-up soil material due to excavation in the baseline 
scenario in stratum i in year t; m 
8.1.4.4.1 
Proxy-based approach 
CO2 emissions from excavated soil may be estimated using proxies (where such proxies meet 
the guidance in Section 8.1.4.1). Where the project proponent uses a proxy, such emissions are 
represented by the following equation: 
GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t = ƒ (GHG emission proxy)
 
 
 
 
 
 
(58) 
8.1.4.4.2 
Published values 
Peer-reviewed published data may be used to generate a value for GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t, CBSL-excav,i,t, 
C%BSL-emitted,i,t,, C%BSL-excav,i,t, BD and Depth based on the average rate of excavated soil CO2 
emissions in the same or similar systems as those in the project area, based on the guidelines 
in Section 8.1.4.1.  
8.1.4.4.3 
Default factors  
A default factor for C%BSL-excav,i,t may be used for the percent carbon at steady-state equilibrium 
20 years following exposure to an aerobic environment in the absence of data suitable for using 
the published value approach, using the value for C%BSL-soil,i,t20 provided in Section 8.1.4.2.3. 
8.1.4.4.4 
Modeling 
A peer-reviewed published model may be used to generate a value of GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t , CBSL-
excav,i,t , C%BSL-emitted,i,t,, C%BSL-excav,i,t , BD or Depth in the same or similar systems as those in the 
project area based on the guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1. 
8.1.4.4.5 
Field-collected data 
Soil coring may be used to generate a value of CBSL-excav,i,t , C%BSL-excav,i,t , BD or Depth as outlined 
in Section 9.3.7. For the baseline scenario, soil cores must be collected within 2 years prior to 
the project start date. Where the project proponent uses an installed reference plane for the 
baseline scenario, it must have been installed at least 4 years prior to the project start date, 
which is good practice to ensure that a reliable average accumulation rate is obtained. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
46 
8.1.4.4.6 
Historical data or chronosequences 
GHGBSL-excav-CO2,i,t , CBSL-excav,i,t , C%BSL-emitted,i,t , BD, or Depth in the baseline scenario may be 
estimated using either historical data collected from the project area or chronosequence data 
collected at similar sites. Refer also to the instructions in Section 8.1.4.1. 
 CH4 emissions from soil 
CH4 emissions from soil in the baseline scenario may be conservatively excluded. If the project 
proponent can demonstrate that conditions for CH4 emissions in the baseline and project 
scenarios will not be different, or conditions will decline, these emissions need not be 
accounted for. 
CH4 emissions from soils may be estimated using:  
1) Proxies 
2) Field-collected data 
3) Published values 
4) Default factors 
5) Models, or  
6) IPCC emission factors 
 
Where the project proponent accounts for CH4 emissions in the baseline scenario, the options 
described in the sections below may be applied to estimate such emissions. 
8.1.4.5.1 
Proxy-based approach 
Where relevant, CH4 emissions from organic soil may be estimated using proxies such as water 
table depth and vegetation composition (where such proxies meet the requirements in Section 
8.1.4.1 above). Where the project proponent uses a proxy, such emissions are represented by 
the following equation:  
GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t = ƒ (GHG emission proxy) × CH4-GWP  
 
 
 
 
(59) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t  
= CH4 emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario; t CO2e  
 
 
ha-1 yr-1 
ƒ (GHG emission proxy)  = Proxy for CH4 emissions; t CH4 ha-1 yr-1 
CH4-GWP  
= Global warming potential of CH4; dimensionless 
8.1.4.5.2 
Field-collected data 
Field-collected data may also be used to estimate CH4 emissions (see Section 9.3.8). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
47 
8.1.4.5.3 
Published values 
Peer-reviewed published data may be used to generate a value based on the average CH4 
emissions rate in the same or similar systems as those in the project area based on the 
guidelines in Section 8.1.4.1 above. 
8.1.4.5.4 
Default factor 
For tidal wetland systems, a default factor25 may be used in the absence of data suitable for 
using the published value approach for the estimation of GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t. Where the salinity 
average or salinity low point is >18 ppt, the project proponent may apply a default emission 
factor of: 
GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t = 0.011 t CH4 ha-1 yr-1 × CH4-GWP
 
 
 
 
 
(60) 
Where the salinity average or salinity low point is ≥ 20 ppt, the project proponent may apply a 
default emission factor of: 
GHGBSL-soil-CH4,i,t = 0.0056 t CH4 ha-1 yr-1 × CH4-GWP 
 
 
 
 
(61)
 
 
 
 
 
Procedures for measuring the salinity average or salinity low point are provided in Section 
9.3.8. 
The project proponent must not use the default value of 0.011 t CH4 ha-1 yr-1 for the baseline 
scenario and 0.0056 t CH4 ha-1 yr-1 for the project scenario to create a difference in emissions 
and claim an emission reduction. The use of the default factor is intended for projects that 
restore salinity levels from fresh/brackish to much higher levels that inhibit CH4 emissions. 
8.1.4.5.5 
Modeling 
A quantitative model which meets the guidance in Section 8.1.4.1 above may also be used to 
estimate CH4 emissions from the SOC pool.  
8.1.4.5.6 
Emission factors 
The most recently published IPCC emission factors may be used to estimate CH4 emissions 
from the SOC pool for non-tidal wetland systems. Tier 1 values may also be used, but must be 
applied conservatively including accounting for local salinity and vegetative cover conditions. 
 N2O emissions from soil 
N2O emissions may be conservatively excluded in the baseline scenario. If the project 
proponent can demonstrate that conditions for N2O emissions in the baseline and project 
 
25 Taken from Poffenbarger et al. 2011 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
48 
scenarios will not be different, or conditions will decline, these emissions need not be 
accounted for. 
N2O emissions from soils may be estimated using:  
1) Proxies  
2) Field-collected data 
3) Published values  
4) Default factors  
5) Models, or  
6) IPCC emission factors 
Where the project proponent accounts for N2O emissions in the baseline scenario, the options 
described in the sections below may be applied to estimate such emissions. 
8.1.4.6.1 
Proxy-based approach 
Where relevant, N2O emissions may be estimated using proxies such as water table depth and 
vegetation composition (where such proxies meet the guidance in Section 8.1.4.1 above). 
Where the project proponent uses a proxy, such emissions are represented by the following 
equation (note that the determination of the similarity of systems must include the nitrogen 
levels of the systems):  
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = ƒ (N2O emission proxy) × N2O-GWP 
 
 
 
 
(62) 
Where: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t  
= N2O emissions from the SOC pool in the baseline scenario due to 
denitrification/nitrification; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
ƒ (N2O emission proxy)  = Proxy for N2O emissions; t N2O ha-1 yr-1 
N2O-GWP
 
= Global warming potential for N2O; dimensionless 
8.1.4.6.2 
Field-collected data 
Field-collected data may be used to estimate N2O emissions (see Section 9.3.8). 
8.1.4.6.3 
Published values 
Peer-reviewed published data may be used to generate a value based on the average N2O 
emissions rate in the same or similar systems as those in the project area based on the 
guidelines described in Section 8.1.4.1. Note that determination of the similarity of systems 
must include the nitrogen levels of the systems. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
49 
8.1.4.6.4 
Default factors 
The following default factors26 may be used for the estimation of GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t in the absence 
of data suitable for using the published value approach. Use of a default factor is only 
permitted for the systems listed below, except where the project area receives hydrologically 
direct inputs from a point or non-point source of nitrogen such as wastewater effluent or an 
intensively nitrogen-fertilized system. 
For open water systems where the salinity average or salinity low point is >18 ppt: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = 0.000157 t N2O ha-1 yr-1 × N2O-GWP
  
 
 
 
(63) 
 
For open water systems where the salinity average or salinity low point is >5 and ≤18 ppt: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = 0.00033 t N2O ha-1 yr-1 × N2O-GWP
 
 
 
 
 
(64) 
 
For other open water systems: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = 0.00053 t N2O ha-1 yr-1 × N2O-GWP
 
 
 
 
 
(65) 
 
For non-seagrass wetland systems where the salinity average or salinity low point is >18 ppt: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = 0.000487 t N2O ha-1 yr-1 × N2O-GWP
  
 
 
 
(66) 
 
For non-seagrass wetland systems where the salinity average or salinity low point is >5 and ≤18 
ppt: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = 0.000754 t N2O ha-1 yr-1 × N2O-GWP
  
 
 
 
(67) 
 
For other non-seagrass wetland systems: 
GHGBSL-soil-N2O,i,t = 0.000864 t N2O ha-1 yr-1 × N2O-GWP
  
 
 
 
(68) 
 
Procedures for measuring the salinity average and salinity low point are set out in Section 9.3.8 
below. 
8.1.4.6.5 
Modeling 
A quantitative model which meets the requirements in Section 8.1.4.1 above may also be used 
to estimate N2O emissions from the SOC pool.  
 
26 Taken from Smith et al. 1983. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
50 
8.1.4.6.6 
Emission factors 
The most recently published IPCC emission factors may also be used to estimate N2O 
emissions from the SOC pool. Tier 1 values may also be used, but must be applied 
conservatively following the guidance in Section 8.1.4.1 above.  
 Emissions from fossil fuel use in baseline scenario  
Emissions from the use of vehicles and mechanical equipment in the baseline scenario 
(GHGBSL-fuel,i,t) may be conservatively excluded. However, these emissions in the baseline 
scenario may be estimated using the procedures in Section 8.2.6 below. 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
 General approach 
Emissions in the project scenario are attributed to carbon stock changes in biomass carbon 
pools, soil processes, or a combination of these. In addition, where relevant, emissions from 
organic soil burns and fossil fuel use may be quantified. 
Organic soil combustion due to anthropogenic fires is addressed using a conservative default 
factor (Fire Reduction Premium) that is expressed as a proportion of the CO2 emissions avoided 
through rewetting (see Section 8.3). 
Emissions in the project scenario are estimated as: 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆= 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠+ 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙+ 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑛+ 𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙
 
 
(69) 
 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠= −∑
∑
(
44
12
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 × ∆𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠,𝑖,𝑡)
 
 
 
 
(70) 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙= −∑
∑
(
44
12
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 × ∆𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) 
 
 
 
 
(71) 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑛= −∑
∑
(
44
12
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 × ∆𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑛,𝑖,𝑡)
 
 
 
 
 
(72)
 
 
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙= −∑
∑
(
44
12
𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
𝑖=1
𝑡∗
𝑡=1
 × ∆𝐶𝑊𝑃𝑆−𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑖,𝑡)
 
 
 
 
 
(73) 
Where: 
GHGWPS   
 
= Net CO2e emissions in the project scenario up to year t*; t CO2e 
GHGWPS-biomass 
 
= Net CO2e emissions from biomass carbon pools in the project scenario  
 
 
 
up to year t*; t CO2e 
GHGWPS-soil 
 
= Net CO2e emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario up to  
 
 
 
year t*; t CO2e 
GHGWPS-burn 
 
= Net CO2e emissions from prescribed burning in the project scenario up  
 
 
 
to year t*; t CO2e 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
51 
GHGWPS-fuel 
 
= Net CO2e emissions from fossil fuel use in the project scenario up to  
 
  
 
year t*; t CO2e 
ΔCWPS-biomass,i,t 
 
= Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in the project
 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
GHGWPS-soil,i,t 
 
= GHG emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i  
 
  
 
in year t; t CO2e yr-1 
GHGWPS-burn,i,t 
 
= GHG emissions from prescribed burning in the project scenario in  
 
 
 
stratum i in year t; t CO2e yr-1 
GHGWPS-fuel,i,t 
 
= GHG emissions from fossil fuel use the project scenario in stratum i in  
 
  
 
year t;  t CO2e yr-1 
i 
  
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
  
 
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
Ex-ante estimates of GHGWPS must be based on a project scenario that is defined ex ante, and 
must be projected using the latest version of VCS module VMD0019 Methods to Project Future 
Conditions. 
Ex-post estimates of GHGWPS must be based on monitoring results. 
 Accounting for sea level rise 
The VCS AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool must be used to assess the future impacts of 
erosion and submergence due to sea level rise on the carbon stocks in the project. The tool 
provides procedures to determine contributions to the AFOLU pooled buffer account. Where a 
loss event occurs, projects must conform with the rules set out in the latest version of the VCS 
Registration and Issuance Process.  
 Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in project scenario  
Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in the project scenario is estimated as: 
ΔCWPS-biomass,i,t = ΔCWPS-tree/shrub,i,t + ΔCWPS-herb,i,t   
 
 
 
 
(74) 
Where: 
ΔCWPS-biomass,i,t 
= Net carbon stock change in biomass carbon pools in the project scenario in 
stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
ΔCWPS-tree/shrub,i,t = Net carbon stock change in tree and shrub carbon pools in the project 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
ΔCWPS-herb,i,t 
= Net carbon stock change in herb carbon pools in the project scenario in stratum i 
in year t; t C yr-1 
i 
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
52 
Trees and shrubs 
The net carbon stock change in trees and shrubs in the project scenario are estimated using 
CDM tool AR-Tool14 Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and 
shrubs in A/R CDM project activities, noting that the following equation applies: 
ΔCWPS-tree/shrub,i,t = 12/44 × (ΔCTREE_PROJ,t + ΔCSHRUB_PROJ,t)  
 
 
 
(75) 
 
Where: 
 
ΔCBSL-tree/shrub,i,t = Net carbon stock change in tree and shrub carbon pools in the project  
 
 
 
scenario in stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
ΔCTREE_PROJ,t  
 = Change in carbon stock in tree biomass in the project scenario in year t; t 
CO2-e yr-1 (derived from application of AR-Tool14; calculations are done for each 
stratum i) 
ΔCSHRUB_PROJ,t   = Change in carbon stock in shrub biomass in the project scenario in year t; t 
CO2-e yr-1 (derived from application of AR-Tool14; calculations are done for 
each stratum i) 
For the ex-ante estimation of tree biomass, an IPCC default factor27 may be used. 
Where reforestation or revegetation activities in the project scenario include harvesting, the 
maximum number of GHG credits generated by these activities must not exceed the long-term 
average GHG benefit from the tree component.  
For strata where harvesting occurs, the maximum carbon stock in tree biomass (CTREE,i,t) used in 
AR-Tool14 is limited to CAVG-TREE,i, calculated as follows: 
𝐶𝐴𝑉𝐺−𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑖=
∑
𝐶𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸,𝑖,𝑡
𝑛𝑡=1
𝑛
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(76) 
Where: 
CAVG-TREE,i  = Long-term average carbon stock in baseline or project tree biomass within the project 
area (in stratum i) in time period n; t CO2-e 
CTREE,i,t   = Carbon stock in baseline or project tree biomass within the project area (in stratum i) 
in year t (derived from application of AR-Tool14); t CO2-e yr-1 
i 
 = 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
 = 1, 2, 3 … n years elapsed since the project start date 
n 
 = Total number of years in the established time period 
The long-term average carbon stock must be calculated for both the baseline and the project 
scenario. 
 
27 2013 Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines: Wetlands (Table 4.4). This value can only be used until biomass stock in Table 4.3 
of the guidelines is reached. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
53 
For projects undertaking even-aged management, the time period n over which the long-term 
average GHG benefit is calculated includes at minimum one full harvest/cutting cycle, including 
the last harvest/cut in the cycle. For projects under conservation easements with no intention 
to harvest after the project crediting period (which must be shown in the project description 
based on verifiable information), or in case of selective cutting, the time period n over which 
the long-term average is calculated is the length of the project crediting period.  
Projects may account for long-term carbon storage in wood products. In this case, the 
parameter CTREE,t in Equation 76 must be read as CTREE,i,t + CWP,i,t. Procedures for the calculation 
of CWP,i,t are provided in Appendix 1. 
Examples of how to calculate the long-term average carbon benefit are provided in VCS 
document AFOLU Guidance: Example for Calculating the Long-Term Average Carbon Stock for 
ARR Projects with Harvesting. 
Restoration projects which include afforestation or reforestation components may account for 
long-term carbon storage in wood products in case trees are harvested before dieback. In this 
case, the parameter CTREE,t in Equation 76 must be read as CTREE,i,t + CWP,i,t. 
CAVG-SHRUB,i is calculated as follows: 
𝐶𝐴𝑉𝐺−𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑖=
∑
𝐶𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑈𝐵,𝑖,𝑡
𝑛𝑡=1
𝑛
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(77) 
Where: 
CAVG-SHRUB,i  
= Long-term average carbon stock in baseline or project shrub biomass within 
the project area (in stratum i) in time period n; t CO2-e 
CSHRUB,i,t   
= Carbon stock in baseline or project shrub biomass within the project area (in  
 
  
stratum i) in year t (derived from application of AR-Tool14); t CO2-e yr-1 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3 … n years elapsed since the project start date 
n 
  
= Total number of years in the established time period 
 
Herbaceous vegetation 
The net carbon stock change in herbaceous vegetation biomass in the project scenario is 
estimated using a carbon stock change approach as follows: 
ΔCWPS-herb,i,t = (CWPS-herb,i,t – CWPS-herb,i,,(t-T)) / T
 
 
 
 
 
 
(78) 
Where: 
ΔCWPS-herb,i,t 
= Net carbon stock changes in herb carbon pools in the project scenario in 
stratum i in year t; t C yr-1 
CWPS-herb,i,t  
= Carbon stock in herbaceous vegetation in the project scenario in stratum i in  
 
VM0033, v2.1 
54 
 
  
year t; t C ha-1 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3 … t* years elapsed since the start of the project activity 
T 
  
= Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 – t1) 
A default factor for CWPS-herb,i,t of 3 t C ha-1 (see Section 8.1.3) may be applied for strata with 
100% herbaceous cover. For areas with a vegetation cover <100%, a 1:1 relationship between 
vegetation cover and CWPS-herb,i,t must be applied. The default factor may be claimed only for the 
first year of the project crediting period as herbaceous biomass quickly reaches a steady state. 
Vegetation cover must be determined by commonly used techniques in field biology. Procedures 
for measuring carbons stocks in herbaceous vegetation are provided in Section 9.3.6. The 
above default factor may not be applied in case AR-Tool14 is used. 
Where the carbon stock change in herbaceous vegetation is quantified in the project scenario, 
it must also be quantified in the baseline scenario. 
 Net GHG emissions and removals from soil in project scenario  
 General 
Net GHG emissions from soils in the project scenario are estimated as: 
GHGWPS-soil,i,t = Ai,t × (GHGWPS-soil-CO2,i,t - Deductionalloch + GHGWPS-soil-CH4,i,t + GHGWPS-soil-N2O,i,t) (28) (79) 
Where: 
GHGWPS-soil,i,t 
= GHG emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i in year 
t; t CO2e yr-1 
GHGWPS-soil-CO2,i,t  = CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i in year t; 
t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
Deductionalloch 
= Deduction from CO2 emissions from the SOC pool to account for the 
percentage of the carbon stock that is derived from allochthonous soil organic 
carbon; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGWPS-soil-CH4,i,t  = CH4 emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i in year t; 
t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGWPS-soil-N2O,i,t  = N2O emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i in year 
t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
Ai,t 
 
= Area of stratum i in year t; ha 
i 
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
 
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
CO2 emissions from the tidal wetland SOC pool in the project scenario may occur in situ or 
indirectly following soil erosion or where soil is exposed to an aerobic environment through 
excavation. If it can be demonstrated that CO2 emissions due to erosion are the result of sea 
 
28 This equation only applies if GHGWPS-soil-CO2,i,t is negative (sequestration). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
55 
level rise, projects do not need to account for this emission source, as it is included in the VCS 
AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool. 
 CO2 emissions from soil 
GHGWPS-soil-CO2,i,t = GHGWPS-insitu-CO2,i,t + GHGWPS-eroded-CO2,i,t + GHGWPS-excav-CO2,i,t  
 
(80) 
Where: 
GHGWPS-soil-CO2,i,t  
= CO2 emissions from the SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i in year t; t 
CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGWPS-insitu-CO2,i,t  
= CO2 emissions from the SOC pool of in-situ soils in the project scenario in 
stratum i in year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGWPS-eroded-CO2,i,t 
= CO2 emissions from the eroded SOC pool in the project scenario in stratum i in 
year t ; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
GHGWPS-excav-CO2,i,t 
= CO2 emissions from the SOC pool of soil exposed to an aerobic environment 
through excavation in the project scenario in stratum i in year t; t CO2e ha-1 yr-1 
CO2 emissions from soils may be estimated using one of the following approaches:  
1) Proxies 
2) Published values 
3) Default factors 
4) Models, or  
5) Field-collected data 
In certain cases, allochthonous soil organic carbon may accumulate in the project area, and 
such carbon must be accounted for in the project scenario. Procedures for the estimation of a 
compensation factor for allochthonous soil organic carbon are specified in Sections 8.1.4.2.7 
and 8.2.4.2.2. 
8.2.4.2.1 
Approaches for estimating GHGWPS-insitu-CO2,i,t GHGWPS-eroded-CO2,i,t and GHGWPS-
excav-CO2,i,t 
GHGWPS-insitu-CO2,i,t , GHGWPS-eroded-CO2,i,t and GHGWPS-excav-CO2,i,t must be calculated using the same 
procedures in Section 8.1.4 above. For all equations in these sections, the subscript BSL must 
be substituted by WPS to make clear that the relevant values are being quantified for the 
project scenario. For these parameters, descriptions are provided in Section Error! Reference 
source not found.. If it can be demonstrated that GHGWPS-eroded-CO2,i,t is the result of sea level 
rise, projects do not need to account for this emission source, as it is included in the VCS 
AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool. 
For both connected and non-connected systems, the project proponent may justify a lower 
C%WPS-emitted,i,t for the project scenario based on appropriate scientific research. In cases 
where erosion rates are lower in the project scenario than the baseline scenario and carbon 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
56 
fate is expected to be similar in both scenarios, this lower value of C%WPS-emitted,i,t must also 
be used for C%BSL-emitted,i,t. 
8.2.4.2.2 
Deduction for allochthonous carbon 
A deduction must be applied to account for allochthonous carbon using the procedures in 
Section 8.1.4.2.7. The project proponent must also follow the additional guidance below. 
The determination of the deduction for allochthonous carbon is mandatory for the project 
scenario unless the project proponent is able to demonstrate that the allochthonous carbon 
would have been returned to the atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide in the absence of 
the project. 
The deduction for allochthonous carbon must only be applied to soil layers deposited or 
accumulated after the project start date (such as materials formed above a feldspar marker 
horizon). 
If the organic surface layer exceeds 10 cm, the soil is deemed organic and no deduction is 
required. If an organic surface layer of up to 10 cm is present, deduction_alloch must be 
determined only in such cases where the project experiences mineral sedimentation events 
sufficient to create mineral soil layers. In practice, the project area may show mineral 
sedimentation in places. If this is observed it is assumed that at some point during the project 
crediting period mineral sediment can be deposited on top of organic surface layers, unless the 
project proponent can justify that strata with an organic surface layer of less than 10 cm will 
not experience mineral sedimentation during the project crediting period. 
 CH4 emissions from soil 
Where the project proponent is able to demonstrate (e.g., if salinity values will not change or 
will increase) that CH4 emissions do not increase in the project scenario compared to the 
baseline scenario, CH4 emissions may be excluded.  
The estimation of CH4 emissions in project scenario must follow one of the approaches 
provided in Section 8.1.4.5 above. For all equations in these sections, the subscript BSL must 
be substituted by WPS to make clear that the relevant values are being quantified for the 
project scenario. 
 N2O emissions from soil 
Where the project proponent is able to demonstrate (e.g., by referring to peer-reviewed 
literature based on similar project circumstances29) that N2O emissions do not increase in the 
project scenario compared to the baseline scenario, N2O emissions may be excluded. 
 
29 Project circumstances are defined by pre-project land use (eg, forestry, agriculture, abandonment after such activities) and 
its intensity (especially related to N-fertilization), climatic zone, water table depths, and soil type. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
57 
N2O emissions must be accounted for in the project scenario in strata where water levels were 
lowered as a result of project activities30. Seagrass restoration projects do not require N2O 
emission accounting. The estimation of N2O emissions in the project scenario may follow one of 
the approaches provided in Section 8.1.4.6. For all equations in these sections, the subscript 
BSL must be substituted by WPS to make clear that the relevant values are being quantified for 
the project scenario. 
In addition, where the project proponent is able to demonstrate (e.g., by referring to peer-
reviewed literature) that N2O emissions in the project scenario are de minimis, N2O emissions 
may be excluded. To demonstrate that N2O emissions are de minimis in the project scenario, 
the project proponent must use CDM tool AR-Tool04 Tool for testing significance of GHG 
emissions in A/R CDM project activities, or refer to peer-reviewed literature. 
 Net non-CO2 emissions from prescribed burning in project scenario 
Where the project proponent introduces prescribed burning of shrub and herbaceous biomass, 
the project proponent must a) demonstrate that the project does not decrease carbon 
sequestration rates if using the default factor approach for carbon dioxide emissions 
accounting from soil, and b) account for CH4 and N2O emissions as follows: 
GHGWPS-burn,i,t = CO2eN2O,i,t + CO2eCH4,i,t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(81) 
CO2eN2O,i,t = Biomassi,t × EFN2O,burn × N2O-GWP × 10-6 × Ai,t  
 
 
 
(82) 
 
CO2eCH4,i,t = Biomassi,t × EFCH4,burn × CH4-GWP × 10-6 × Ai,t 
 
 
 
(83) 
Where: 
GHGWPS-burn,i,t 
= GHG emissions from prescribed burning in the project scenario in stratum i in  
 
  
year t; t CO2e yr-1 
CO2eN2O,i,t  
= CO2e emissions resulting from N2O emissions due to prescribed burning in 
stratum i in year t; t CO2e yr-1.  
CO2eCH4,i,t   
= CO2e emissions resulting from CH4 emissions due to prescribed burning in  
 
  
stratum i in year t; t CO2e yr-1.  
Biomassi,t  
= Aboveground shrub biomass in stratum i in year t (from Section 8.2.3), kg d.m.  
 
  
ha-1  
EFN2O,burn  
= Emission factor for N2O for vegetation burning; g N2O / kg dry biomass  
EFCH4,burn  
= Emission factor for CH4 for vegetation burning; g CH4 / kg dry biomass 
N2O-GWP
  
= Global warming potential of N2O; dimensionless 
CH4-GWP  
= Global warming potential of CH4; dimensionless 
Ai,t 
 
 
= Area of stratum i in year t; ha  
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
 
30 See applicability conditions. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
58 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
 Emissions from fossil fuel use 
Where emissions from the use of vehicles and mechanical equipment for earth moving in WRC 
project activities are above de minimis as compared to the baseline scenario, such emissions must 
be estimated by applying CDM tool AR-Tool05 Estimation of GHG emissions related to fossil fuel 
combustion in A/R CDM project activities, noting that the following equation applies: 
GHGWPS-fuel,i,t = ETFC,y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(84) 
Where: 
GHGWPS-fuel,i,t 
= GHG emissions from fossil fuel use in the project scenario in stratum i in year t; t 
CO2e yr-1 
ETFC,y    
= CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion during the year y; t CO2 (derived  
 
  
from application of CDM tool AR-Tool05 Estimation of GHG emissions  
 
  
related to fossil fuel combustion in A/R CDM project activities; calculations  
 
  
are done for each stratum i) 
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
t 
  
= 1, 2, 3, … t* years elapsed since the project start date 
The tool has been designed for A/R CDM project activities, but must be used for the purposes 
of this methodology, noting the following: 
Where the tool refers to:  
It must be understood as referring to: 
A/R 
WRC 
CDM 
VCS 
DOE 
VVB 
8.3 
Emission reductions due to rewetting and fire management (Fire 
Reduction Premium) 
This methodology addresses the emission reductions generated from reduced anthropogenic 
fires occurring in drained organic soils due to rewetting and fire management. Emission 
reductions are estimated using a conservative default factor which is based on fire occurrence 
and extension in the project area in the baseline scenario. This method avoids the need for 
direct assessment of GHG emissions from fire in the baseline and the project scenarios. The 
project proponent must apply the latest version of VCS module VMD0046 Methods for 
monitoring soil carbon stock changes and GHG emissions in WRC project activities to estimate 
of the Fire Reduction Premium (FRP). 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
59 
For each stratum with organic soil to which the project proponent applies the approach, the 
parameters Epeatsoil-WPS,i,t (Greenhouse gas emissions from the peat soil within the project 
boundary in the project scenario in stratum i in year t (t CO2e yr-1)) and Epeatsoil-BSL,i,,t (GHG 
emissions from microbial decomposition of the peat soil within the project boundary in the 
baseline scenario in stratum i in year t (t CO2e yr-1)) in the module are obtained from GHGWPS-
soil,i,t and GHGBSL-soil,i,t. 
8.4 
Leakage 
 Activity-shifting leakage and market leakage 
The applicability conditions of this methodology are structured to ensure that activity-shifting 
leakage and market leakage do not occur. As such, where the applicability conditions of this 
methodology are met, activity-shifting leakage and market leakage may be assumed to be zero. 
 Ecological leakage 
It may be assumed that ecological leakage does not occur in projects meeting the applicability 
conditions of this methodology, because projects must be designed in a manner which ensures 
that their hydrological connectivity with adjacent areas does not lead to a significant increase in 
GHG emissions outside the project area. This may be achieved by a project design which 
causes no alteration of mean annual water table depths or flooding frequency or duration in 
adjacent areas, or limiting such alteration to levels that do not influence GHG emissions. 
Where, at the design stage, hydrological changes are expected to impact GHG emissions in 
areas outside the project area, the project design must be adjusted to include such areas in the 
project area. 
The project proponent must demonstrate that their project design meets these requirements 
through expert judgment, hydrologic modeling or monitoring of alterations of water table depth 
at the project area. In tidal wetland restoration projects, de-watering downstream wetlands is 
not expected if project areas are set sufficiently large to include expected areas of changed 
hydrology. 
Hydrologic models must consider water displacement from project activities and the hydrologic 
connection or blockage of inlets that would change the wetland boundary. Procedures for 
monitoring alterations of water table depth at the project area are provided in Section 9.3.4. 
The tidal range and sediment delivery experienced by wetlands outside the project area must 
remain within the system tolerance, which is defined by the high and low tides and regional 
sediment budget, and assessed using hydrological models (and/or empirical analysis) and 
expert judgment. 
To guide this assessment, Table 3 outlines avoidance criteria related to a variety of processes 
that may occur outside the project area due to an inappropriate project design. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
60 
Table 3: Processes Associated with Ecological Leakage Outside Project Boundary and 
Related Criteria for their Avoidance 
Ecological leakage process outside project 
boundary 
Avoidance criterion 
Lowering water table that causes increased 
soil carbon oxidation 
Maintain wetland conditions (e.g., converting from 
impounded water to a wetland does not cause soil 
oxidation) 
Lowering water table that causes increased 
N2O emissions 
No conversion of non-seagrass wetland to open water 
Raising water table that causes increased CH4 
emissions 
No conversion of non-wetland to wetland 
Raising water table that causes decreased 
vegetation production that causes decreased 
new soil carbon sequestration 
No causation of vegetated to non-vegetated (or poorly 
vegetated) conditions 
 
Projects meeting the requirements of this Section Error! Reference source not found. may 
assume that GHGLK = 0. 
8.5 
Net GHG Emission Reductions and Removals 
 Calculation of net GHG emissions reductions  
The total net GHG emission reductions from the RWE or ARR/RWE project activity are 
calculated as follows: 
NERRWE = GHGBSL – GHGWPS + FRP – GHGLK 
 
 
 
 
 
(85) 
Where: 
NERRWE31  
= Net CO2e emission reductions from the RWE project activity; t CO2e 
GHGBSL   
= Net CO2e emissions in the baseline scenario; t CO2e 
GHGWPS   
= Net CO2e emissions in the project scenario; t CO2e 
FRP 
  
= Fire Reduction Premium (net CO2e emission reductions from organic soil  
 
  
combustion due to rewetting and fire management); t CO2e 
GHGLK 
 
 
= Net CO2e emissions due to leakage; t CO2e 
 
Long-term benefit in WRC projects 
 
31 Also stands for NERARR/RWE 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
61 
For projects claiming reductions of baseline GHG emissions, or for conservation and restoration 
projects where sea level rise may cause a loss of tidal wetland and associated biomass and/or 
soil organic carbon stocks, the maximum quantity of GHG emission reductions or removals that 
may be claimed from the biomass and soil organic carbon pool is limited to the net GHG benefit 
generated by the project 100 years after its start date, as follows: 
NERRWE-max = NERRWE at t = 100
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(86) 
 
Where: 
 
NERRWE-max 
= Maximum net CO2e emission reductions or removals that can be claimed  
 
 
 
from the RWE project activity at any point in time during the crediting period;  
 
 
 
t CO2e 
 
NERRWE  
= Net CO2e emission reductions from the RWE project activity (from Equation  
 
 
 
85); t CO2e 
Note also that NERRWE must be corrected for uncertainty by estimating the total uncertainty for 
the RWE project activity (NERRWE_ERROR) using the procedures in Section 8.5.2 below. 
 Estimation of uncertainty 
The following procedure allows the project proponent to estimate uncertainty in the estimation 
of emissions and carbon stock changes (i.e., for calculating a precision level and any deduction 
in credits for lack of precision following project implementation and monitoring) by assessing 
uncertainty in baseline and project estimations. 
This procedure focuses on the following sources of uncertainty: 
• 
Uncertainty associated with estimation of stocks in carbon pools and changes in 
carbon stocks  
• 
Uncertainty in assessment of project emissions 
Where an uncertainty value is not known or cannot be calculated, the project proponent must 
justify that it is using a conservative number and an uncertainty of 0% may be used for this 
component. 
Uncertainty guidance  
A precision target of a 90% or 95% confidence interval equal to or less than 20% or 30%, 
respectively, of the recorded value must be targeted. This is especially important in terms of 
project planning for measurement of carbon stocks where sufficient measurement plots should 
be included to achieve this precision level across the measured stocks. 
Levels of uncertainty must be known for all aspects of baseline and project implementation and 
monitoring. Uncertainty will generally be known as the 90% or 95% confidence interval 
expressed as a percentage of the mean. Where uncertainty is not known, it must be 
demonstrated that the value used is conservative. 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
62 
Estimated carbon emissions and removals arising from AFOLU activities have uncertainties 
associated with the measures and estimates of several parameters. These include the project 
area or other activity data, carbon stocks, biomass growth rates, expansion factors and other 
coefficients. It is assumed that the uncertainties associated with the estimates of the various 
input data are available, either as default factors given in IPCC Guidelines (2006), IPCC GPG-
LULUCF (2003), expert judgment or estimates based of sound statistical sampling. 
Alternatively, conservative estimates may also be used instead of uncertainties, provided that 
they are based on verifiable literature sources or expert judgment. In this case the uncertainty 
is assumed to be zero. However, these procedures combine uncertainty information and 
conservative estimates resulting in an overall ex-post project uncertainty. 
Planning to diminish uncertainty 
It is important that the process of project planning consider uncertainty. Procedures including 
stratification and the allocation of sufficient measurement plots help ensure that low 
uncertainty in carbon stocks results and ultimately full crediting can result. 
It is good practice to apply this procedure at an early stage to identify the data sources with the 
highest uncertainty to allow the opportunity to conduct further work to diminish uncertainty. 
Note that in Parts 1 – 3 below the denominators of the equations must be expressed in 
absolute values. 
Part 1 – Uncertainty in baseline estimates 
𝑈𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑖= 
√(𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆1,𝑖×𝐸𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆1,𝑖)2+ (𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆2,𝑖 ×𝐸𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆2,𝑖)2…+...(𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆𝑛,𝑖×𝐸𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆𝑛,𝑖)2
𝐸𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆1,𝑖+𝐸𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆2,𝑖…+...𝐸𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑆𝑆𝑛,𝑖
 (87)
 
 
Where: 
UncertainBSL,i 
= Percentage uncertainty in the combined carbon stocks and GHG sources  
 
  
in the baseline scenario in stratum i; % 
UBSL,SS,i   
= Percentage uncertainty (expressed as 90% confidence interval as a  
 
 
percentage of the mean, where appropriate) for carbon stocks and GHG  
 
 
sources in the baseline scenario in stratum i (1,2…n represent different  
 
 
carbon pools and/or GHG sources); %  
EBSL,SS,i   
= Carbon stock or GHG sources (e.g., trees, down dead wood) in stratum i  
 
  
(1,2…n represent different carbon pools and/or GHG sources) in the baseline  
 
  
scenario; t CO2e  
i 
  
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
To assess uncertainty across combined strata, use the equation below: 
𝑈𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐵𝑆𝐿= 
√(𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐿,2×𝐴1)2+(𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐿,2×𝐴2)2…+...(𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐿,𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿×𝐴𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿)2
𝐴1+𝐴2…+...𝐴𝑀𝐵𝑆𝐿
 
 
 
 
(88) 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
63 
Where: 
UncertainBSL 
 
= Total uncertainty in baseline scenario; % 
UBSL,i 
  
 
= Uncertainty in baseline scenario in stratum i; %  
Ai 
  
 
= Area of stratum i; ha  
i 
  
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MBSL strata in the baseline scenario 
 
Part 2 – Uncertainty ex-post in the project scenario 
𝑼𝒏𝒄𝒆𝒓𝒕𝒂𝒊𝒏𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝒊= 
√(𝑼𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝟏,𝒊×𝑬𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝟏,𝒊)𝟐+ (𝑼𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝟐,𝒊 ×𝑬𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝟐,𝒊)𝟐…+...(𝑼𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝒏,𝒊×𝑬𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝒏,𝒊)𝟐
𝑬𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝟏,𝒊+𝑬𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝟐,𝒊…+...𝑬𝑾𝑷𝑺,𝑺𝑺𝒏,𝒊
 
(89) 
Where: 
UncertainWPS,i 
 
= Percentage uncertainty in the combined carbon stocks and GHG  
 
 
 
sources in the project scenario in stratum i; % 
UWPS,SS,i   
 
= Percentage uncertainty (expressed as 90% confidence interval as a  
 
  
 
percentage of the mean, where appropriate) for carbon stocks and GHG  
 
  
 
sources in the project scenario in stratum i (1,2…n represent different  
 
  
 
carbon pools and/or GHG sources); %  
EWPS,SS,i   
 
= Carbon stock or GHG sources (e.g., trees, down dead wood, etc.) in  
 
  
 
stratum i (1,2…n represent different carbon pools and/or GHG sources)  
 
  
 
in the project scenario; t CO2e  
i 
  
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
To assess uncertainty across combined strata, use the equation below: 
𝑈𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑊𝑃𝑆= 
√(𝑈𝑊𝑃𝑆,2×𝐴1)2+(𝑈𝑊𝑃𝑆,2×𝐴2)2…+...(𝑈𝑊𝑃𝑆,𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆×𝐴𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆)2
𝐴1+𝐴2…+...𝐴𝑀𝑊𝑃𝑆
 
 
 
(90) 
Where: 
UncertainWPS 
 
= Total uncertainty in project scenario; % 
UWPS,i 
  
 
= Uncertainty in project scenario in stratum i; %  
Ai 
  
 
= Area of stratum i; ha  
i 
  
 
= 1, 2, 3 …MWPS strata in the project scenario 
Part 3 – Total error in project activity 
𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑅𝑅𝑂𝑅= 
√(𝑈𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐵𝑆𝐿×𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿)2+(𝑈𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑊𝑃𝑆×𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆)2
𝐺𝐻𝐺𝐵𝑆𝐿+𝐺𝐻𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑆
 
 
 
(91) 
Where: 
NERERROR  
 
= Total uncertainty for project activity; % 
UncertainBSL 
 
= Total uncertainty in baseline scenario; %  
UncertainWPS 
 
= Total uncertainty in the project scenario; % 
GHGBSL   
 
= Net CO2e emissions in the baseline scenario up to year t*; t CO2e 
GHGWPS   
 
= Net CO2e emissions in the project scenario up to year t*; t CO2e 
 
VM0033, v2.1 
64 
The allowable uncertainty is 20% or 30% of NERt at a 90% or 95% confidence level, 
respectively. Where this precision level is met, no deduction must result for uncertainty. Where 
this precision level is exceeded, a deduction equal to the amount that the uncertainty exceeds 
the allowable level must be applied. The adjusted value for NERt to account for uncertainty 
must be calculated as: 
adjusted_NERt = NERt x (100% - NERERROR + allowable_uncert)  
 
 
(92) 
Where: 
adjusted_NERt 
 
= Net GHG emission reductions in year t adjusted to account for  
 
 
 
uncertainty; t CO2e  
NERt 
 
 
= Total net GHG emission reductions from the project activity up to year  
 
 
 
t; t CO2e  
NERERROR 
 
= Total uncertainty for WRC project activity; % 
allowable_unsert  
= Allowable uncertainty; 20% or 30% at a 90% or 95% confidence level,  
 
 
 
respectively; % 
 Calculation of Verified Carbon Units 
In order to calculate the number of Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) that may be issued, the project 
proponent must consider the number of buffer credits which must be deposited in the AFOLU 
pooled buffer account. The number of buffer credits which must be deposited in the AFOLU 
pooled buffer account is based on the net change in carbon stocks. 
The number of verified carbon units (VCUs) is calculated as: 
𝑉𝐶𝑈𝑡2 = (𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑁𝐸𝑅𝑡2 −𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑_𝑁𝐸𝑅𝑡1) × 𝐵𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑡2
 
 
 
 
(93) 
 
Where: 
 
VCUt2 
 
 
= Number of VCUs in year t2 
 
 
adjusted_NER t1  
= Total net GHG emission reductions from the project activity up to year  
 
 
 
 
t1 adjusted to account for uncertainty; t CO2e  
 
adjusted_NERt2  
= Total net GHG emission reductions from the project activity up to year  
 
 
 
 
t2 adjusted to account for uncertainty; t CO2e  
 
Bufferwt2 
 
= Number of buffer credits to be contributed to the AFOLU pooled buffer  
 
 
 
 
account in year t2 
𝐵𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑡2 = (𝑁𝐸𝑅𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘,𝑡2 −𝑁𝐸𝑅𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘,𝑡1) × 𝐵𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟%𝑡2 
 
 
 
 
(94) 
Where: 
Bufferwt2  
 
= Number of buffer credits to be contributed to the AFOLU pooled buffer  
 
  
 
account in year t2 
 
NERstock, t1 
 
= Net GHG emission reductions from the project activity up to year t1,  
 
  
 
discarding non-CO2 emissions from soil and biomass burning and  
 
  
 
emissions from fossil fuel use; t CO2e  
NERstock, t2 
 
= Net GHG emission reductions from the project activity up to year t2,  
 
VM0033, v2.1 
65 
 
  
 
discarding non-CO2 emissions from soil and biomass burning and  
 
  
 
emissions from fossil fuel use; t CO2e  
Buffer%t2  
 
= Percentage of buffer credits to be contributed to the AFOLU pooled  
 
  
 
buffer account in year t2; % 
The percentage of buffer credits to be contributed to the AFOLU pooled buffer account must be 
determined by applying the latest version of the VCS AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool.