10  
REFERENCES 
US Environmental Protection Agency (2017). eGRID2014v2 Summary Table.  
US Department of Energy (2018). Model Year 2016 Fuel Economy Guide.  
Idaho National Laboratory. The EV Project. Retrieved from https://avt.inl.gov/project-type/ev-
project 
Zhou, Y. Light Duty Electric Drive Vehicles Monthly Sales Updates. Retrieved from Argonne 
National Laboratory: https://www.anl.gov/energy-systems/project/light-duty-electric-drive-vehicles-
monthly-sales-updates 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
53
APPENDIX 1: CALCULATION OF BASELINE DEFAULT VALUES FOR THE US AND 
CANADA 
This appendix outlines the basis for the calculation of the optional default values used in the baseline 
emission calculations for U.S. LDV and HDV projects, and Canadian HDV projects. Values used to 
calculate the default value results were presented to the VVB via a separate Excel workbook during the 
approval process of the methodology. 
Projects must apply the default value using units for EF (CO2 or CO2e) consistent with their project 
boundary choices, consistent across all project activity sources. 
 
LDV Weighted Averages in the United States 
Weighted averages for LDVs are based upon: 
 
The total number of each BEV and PHEV model on the road by end of 2015, based upon 
cumulative US sales data for 2010-2015 sourced from Argonne National Laboratories’ monthly 
emails and web site42 
 
Kwh/100 mile and MPG ratings sourced from www.fueleconomy.gov or the 2016 Fuel Economy 
Guide, https://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/pdfs/guides/FEG2016.pdf 
 
Gasoline was the fuel which the comparable fossil fuel cars consumed 
The simple weighted average has been calculated for each applicable fleet (BEV+PHEV and BEV) based 
upon the number of EV models of each type on the road by end of 2015 multiplied by its corresponding 
kwh/100 mile value (AFEC) and equivalent fossil fuel vehicle’s MPG value (MPG), which are listed in the 
table below.  
Table A1: LDV Project Default Value Table 
Applicable fleet 
AFECiy  
MPGjy 
EFjy 
L1/L2 (BEV and PHEV average) 
33.32 
29.18 
19.56 lbs CO2/gal = 0.0088 tCO2/gal  
or 0.0088 tCO2e/gal 
DCFC (BEV average) 
31.88 
29.10 
19.56 lbs CO2/gal = 0.0088 tCO2e/gal 
or 0.0088 tCO2e/gal 
 
HDV Weighted Averages in the United States 
Each of these e-bus and e-truck weighted averages are based upon: 
 
The total number of each e-bus and e-truck models on the road in the US by beginning of 2017, 
based upon on data sourced from IHS Markit  
                                                 
42 Argonne National Lab’s (ANL) monthly emails uses data sourced from the hybridcars.com web site: 
http://www.hybridcars.com/december-2016-dashboard/  The main ANL web link is found here including the email 
address for the database manager: https://www.anl.gov/energy-systems/project/light-duty-electric-drive-vehicles-
monthly-sales-updates 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
54
 
The corresponding GWV classification for each model of e-bus and e-truck on the road, based 
upon data sourced from IHS Markit 
 
Kwh/mile data sourced for e-buses from commercial sources (confidential) and for e-trucks from 
Smith Electric and NREL reports for e-delivery truck vehicles as follows: 
o 
http://insideevs.com/smith-electric-vehicles-distance-energy-consumption/   
o 
http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy17osti/66382.pdf  
 
Average MPG ratings for the corresponding class of MDV/HDV, as sourced from independent 
academic sources, specifically: https://www.nap.edu/read/12845/chapter/4#18 
 
Diesel fuel was the dominant baseline bus and truck fuel 
The simple weighted average is calculated for each applicable fleet (e-bus and e-truck) based upon the 
number of EV models of each type on the road by beginning of 2017 multiplied by its corresponding 
kwh/100 mile value (AFEC) and equivalent GWV class of fossil fuel vehicle’s average MPG value (MPG), 
which are listed in the table below. 
Table A2: HDV Project Default Value Table 
Applicable fleet 
AFECiy  
MPGjy 
EFjy 
e-buses 
300 
4.34 
22.4 lbs CO2/gal = 0.0102 tCO2/gal 
or 0.0102 tCO2e/gal 
e-trucks 
140 
8.60 
22.4 lbs CO2/gal = 0.0102 tCO2e/gal 
or 0.0102 tCO2e/gal 
LDV Weighted Averages in Canada 
These weighted averages are based upon: 
 
The total number of each BEV and PHEV model on the road by end of 2016, based upon 
cumulative Canada data; kwh/100 mile and MPG ratings, all sourced from Natural Resources 
Canada 
 
Gasoline was the fuel which the comparable fossil fuel cars consumed 
The simple weighted average has been calculated for each applicable fleet (BEV+PHEV and BEV) based 
upon the number of EV models of each type on the road by beginning of 2017 multiplied by its 
corresponding kwh/100 mile value (AFEC) and equivalent fossil fuel vehicle’s MPG value (MPG), which 
are listed in the table below. 
Table A3: LDV Project Default Value Table for Canada 
Applicable fleet 
AFECiy  
MPGjy 
EFjy 
L1/L2 (BEV and PHEV average) 
35.44  
29.65 
19.56 lbs CO2/gal = 0.0088 tCO2/gal 
or 0.0088 tCO2e/gal 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
55
DCFC (BEV average) 
33.00 
27.71 
19.56 lbs CO2/ga = 0.0088 tCO2/gall 
or 0.0088 tCO2e/gal 
 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
56
APPENDIX 2: GUIDANCE FOR DESIGN OF ADEQUATE METERING SYSTEMS FOR AI PROJECTS 
This appendix outlines guidance for the design and application of metering systems of charging systems 
to adequately measure electricity exchanges when associated infrastructure (AI) is incorporated into 
projects when they apply to the determination of project emissions, as shown in Figure A1.  If associated 
infrastructure is incorporated into the project boundary, PE equations 7, 8, or 9 are applicable. 
Figure A1: Examples of Associated Infrastructure and Electricity Flows 
 
When incorporating associated infrastructure, the charging system’s metering system must adequately 
and accurately measure and trace the net electricity kwh provided to the charging system (i.e., deliveries 
minus receipts) from all electricity sourced from and returned to the grid, and the dedicated renewables. 
This may include dedicated renewable energy (e.g., on site) delivered to the EV directly and/or via on-site 
batteries, and net of kwh returned back to such sources from the EV batteries. 
 
Note that metering systems for associated infrastructure can include “downstream” meters close to the 
EV, such as those provided by DCFC onboard meters (and referenced specifically in the ED parameter 
for kwh delivered by a charger to the EV which applies to the BE calculations), and “upstream” meters, 
located grid-side such as meters monitoring electricity (in kwh) delivered to the on-site batteries (which 
could be designed/applied to measure the kwh which a charger consumes in the EC parameter 
measurements which applies to the PE calculations).   
Where the system’s meters are located further “upstream”, in order to not include any electricity lost to the 
EV charging system, any electricity sourced from associated infrastructure sources (notably from solar 
and the on-site battery) but delivered outside the EV charging system (e.g. delivered to the grid or the 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
57
local building when the on-site battery is used as a back up generator source), must be sensibly taken 
into account for quantification. This includes the following examples: 
1) Where the metered kwh to the on-site battery is located “upstream” on the grid side (rather than 
downstream of the on-site battery in the charger where electricity delivered to the EV is 
measured), any electricity that the on-site battery provides back to the grid, or its building in a 
given year must be measured and subtracted -- as LECijy -- since these kwh represent losses to 
the overall charging system and do not result in EV miles driven. 
2) Where the on-site battery is not connected to the grid or building (i.e., it does not serve as a 
power back up system), then the on-site battery does not need to be accounted for as a separate 
source, since it merely acts as a flow through for the grid and renewables sources. Any electricity 
received from the EV would also be returned to the EV. Therefore, the on-site battery would 
supply electricity consistent with the change in stored power between the year’s starting and end 
points which, compared to the kwh supplied by the grid and/or dedicated renewables, would be 
de minimis. 
3) Any transfer of electricity from the EV to the onsite battery represent internal flows within the 
system and can be set aside since the electricity must either be returned downstream to the EV 
at a later date or tracked via LEC if subsequently delivered back to the grid via the on-site battery. 
Therefore, transfers of electricity from the EV to the onsite battery can be set aside. 
4) Projects must be able to measure or sensibly estimate the electricity supplied from the grid and/or 
from dedicated renewable sources to the charger system and this may be a subset of the total 
electricity from this source. For example, the electricity delivered to the charging system may be 
less than the total electricity generated by the onsite renewables if these renewables also provide 
power back to the grid within a particular associated infrastructure system43. Similarly, the total 
grid electricity delivered to the system may be shared across both the EV charger if delivered 
directly while also supplying in parallel electricity to the on-site battery – the former contributing to 
NEC from the grid source and latter to NEC for the on-site battery. 
Where the systems meters are located “downstream”, in order to not include any electricity lost to the EV 
charging system, any electricity sourced from associated infrastructure sources must be sensibly taken 
into account for quantification. This includes the following examples: 
1) Although upstream-metering, (the measurement of kwh consumed by the chargers for parameter 
EC), typically applies for the PE calculations, the calculation of PE values can be made using 
downstream meters located in the chargers’ internal systems provided appropriate efficiency 
factors are applied to take account of chargers’ own electricity consumption. Where downstream 
measurement of PE is applied: 
 
For PE calculations using downstream metering, consistent with the guidance in the 
parameter boxes for EC, ECTOD, NEC and NECT, efficiency factors must be applied to 
                                                 
43 At a future date, projects may wish to consider issuing GHG credits for the subset of kwh delivered from the 
dedicated renewables to the grid (but not to the EV charger) using methodologies such as AMS-I.F 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/9KJWQ1G0WEG6LKHX21MLPS8BQR7242  
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
58
account for potential efficiency losses due to the chargers’ own kwh consumption. For L2s, 
such efficiency losses are de minimis44 and so no efficiency factor is applied in the L2 EC, 
ECTOD, NEC and NECT parameter applications (since “downstream” meters would have de 
minimis variances with upstream meters). For DCFCs, if kwh data is sourced from 
“downstream” meters located within their own DCFCs internal smart meter systems 
(assuming as needed across these parameters that these smart meters are capable of 
differentiating inter alia the net kwh delivered to the EV’s from each source s during time 
period t), then to establish the PE equation electricity consumed by the DCFC charger a 
DCFC default efficiency factor of 92.3% is applied to these internal smart DCFC metered kwh 
readings (i.e., using approach A in the parameter boxes)).   
 
Alternatively, DCFCs can use approach B applying “upstream” meter kwh measurements 
which are on the grid-side of the DCFC units/AI (e.g., for each source s and time period t).   
 
However, often relative to time-of-day periods t for NECT and ECTOD measurements, it is a 
DCFC’s own “downstream” internal “smart” meters which have the most sophisticated 
metering capabilities for such time-of-day applications (whereupon approach A would be 
followed and the DCFC default efficiency factor applied).  
 
For DCFC using approach A, the default efficiency value applied would be the “downstream” 
smart meter’s reading divided by the efficiency factor of 0.923 in order to estimate the kwh 
consumed by the DCFC fast charger on an “upstream kwh consumed” basis (as needed for 
the PE equations).  
 
If a project can demonstrate a more accurate efficiency factor for their particular DCFC 
systems (for example due to improvements in DCFC technology efficiencies over time), this 
updated accurate efficiency factor may be substituted for the 92.3% default efficiency value. 
2) Where meters are located downstream for the measurement of NEC pertaining to the on-site 
battery, then the electricity measured must already be net of any LEC losses from the on-site 
battery to the grid – and thus LEC must be set at zero. This basis for such on-site battery net 
electricity measurements would be consistent with DCFC’s measurement systems which track 
the electricity exchanges close the point of delivery to the EV. Additionally, for downstream 
metering, the electricity provided by the EV to the onsite battery must be measured for the 
calculation of NEC for the on-site battery (that is, it cannot be set aside for downstream metering). 
3) Where the EV is delivering vehicle-to-grid (V2G) services where electricity from the car’s on-
board battery is returned directly to the grid, these EV-sourced electricity are netted out in the 
grid-sourced net-kwh (that is, in the calculation of NEC for the grid source s).  
4) Where charging systems include simple associated infrastructure settings, such as residences 
using L1/L2 systems where “upstream” metering systems apply and where the associated 
infrastructure system elements can be limited (e.g. no on-site battery).  
Note that the quantification of emissions from project associated infrastructure systems can be 
simplified using sensible estimates. For example, where a household residence has a solar panel 
                                                 
44 Per INL: https://avt.inl.gov/evse-type/ac-level-2  
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
59
that is grid-connected – which, while its total solar kwh production and grid-sales are metered, 
does not have a separate sub-meter to establish the solar kwh supplied to the EV charging 
system specifically -- it is acceptable to assume that the kwh delivered to the EV charger is the 
same weighted average as the solar/grid kwh mix the household itself consumed (i.e., sources 
whose electricity would have been separately metered). Utility-style modeling is also acceptable 
for settings where only the net electricity consumption/generation is measured for a household in 
order to establish the electricity delivered by both the grid and the on-site renewables and thus 
the required weighted average.