10 REFERENCES 
American Carbon Registry (ACR). 2023. Methodology for the Quantification, Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions and Removals from the 
Destruction of Ozone Depleting Substances and High-GWP Foam. 
https://acrcarbon.org/methodology/destruction-of-ozone-depleting-substances-and-high-gwp-
foam/.  
California Air Resources Board. 2011. Lifecycle Analysis of High-Global Warming Potential 
Greenhouse Gas Destruction. Prepared by ICF. 
https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/classic/research/apr/past/07-330.pdf.   
Climate Action Reserve (CAR). 2012a. Article 5 Ozone Depleting Substances Project Protocol. 
https://www.climateactionreserve.org/how/protocols/industrial/ozone-depleting-substances/.  
Climate Action Reserve (CAR). 2012b. US Ozone Depleting Substances Project Protocol. 
https://www.climateactionreserve.org/how/protocols/industrial/ozone-depleting-substances/.  
Dellinger, B., C. W. Lamb, P. Kumar, and M. Wagner. 2010. “Theoretical estimation of 
incinerability of halons and hydrochlorofluorocarbons.” Environmental Engineering Science 
27(7): 587–591. https://doi.org/10.1089/ees.2009.0393 
Fredenslund, A. M., C Scheutz, and P. Kjeldsen. 2005. Disposal of Refrigerators-Freezers in 
the U.S.: State of the Practice. Technical University of Denmark. 
ICF. 2018. ODS Destruction in the United States and Abroad. 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-03/documents/ods-destruction-in-the-us-and-
abroad_feb2018.pdf. 
Lamb, C., B. Dellinger, M. Wagner, and R. Lanza. 2008. Incinerability of Halons and HCFCs: 
Theoretical Calculations of DRE and Ozone-Depleting or Global-Warming Gases. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236168646_Incinerability_of_Halons_and_HCFCs
_Theoretical_Calculations_of_DRE_and_Ozone-Depleting_or_Global-Warming_Gases. 
Scheutz, C., A. M. Fredenslund, P. Kjeldsen, and M. Tant. 2007a. “Release of fluorocarbons 
from insulation foam in home appliances during shredding.” Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association 57(12): 1452–60. https://doi.org/10.3155/1047-3289.57.12.1452  
Scheutz, C., Y. Dote, A. M. Fredenslund, H Mosbæk, and P. Kjeldsen. 2007b. “Attenuation of 
insulation foam released fluorocarbons in landfills.” Environmental Science and Technology 41: 
7714–22.  
UNEP Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP). 2006. “Code of Good 
Housekeeping.” In Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone 
Layer. 7th ed. 
VM0016, v2.0 
63 
UNEP Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP). 2002. Report of the Task Force on 
Destruction Technologies. https://ozone.unep.org/node/3783. 
UNEP Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP). 2018. Task Force Report on 
Destruction Technologies for Controlled Substances. 
https://ozone.unep.org/sites/default/files/2019-04/TEAP-DecXXIX4-TF-Report-April2018.pdf. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 2023a. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2021. https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/inventory-us-
greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-sinks-1990-2021.  
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 2023b. Emission Factors for 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
03/ghg_emission_factors_hub.pdf.  
 
VM0016, v2.0 
64 
APPENDIX 1: ODS AND HFCS  
Substance terms based on the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. 
https://ozone.unep.org/treaties/montreal-protocol 
 
Table A1. Annex A controlled substances – Group I 
Substance  
CFCl3 
CFC-11  
CF2Cl2 
CFC-12  
C2F3Cl3 
CFC-113  
C2F4Cl2 
CFC-114  
C2F5Cl 
CFC-115  
  
Table A2. Annex B controlled substances – Group I 
Substance  
CF3Cl  
CFC-13  
C2FCl5  
CFC-111  
C2F2Cl4  
CFC-112  
C3FCl7  
CFC-211  
C3F2Cl6  
CFC-212  
C3F3Cl5  
CFC-213  
C3F4Cl4  
CFC-214  
C3F5Cl3  
CFC-215  
C3F6Cl2  
CFC-216  
C3F7Cl  
CFC-217  
 
Table A3. Annex C controlled substances – Group I 
Substance  
VM0016, v2.0 
65 
CHFCl2   
HCFC-21**   
CHF2Cl   
HCFC-22**   
CH2FCl   
HCFC-31   
C2HFCl4  
HCFC-121   
C2HF2Cl3   
HCFC-122   
C2HF3Cl2   
HCFC-123   
CHCl2CF3   
HCFC-123**   
C2HF4Cl   
HCFC-124   
CHFClCF3   
HCFC-124**   
C2H2FCl3   
HCFC-131   
C2H2F2Cl2   
HCFC-132   
C2H2F3Cl   
HCFC-133   
C2H3FCl2   
HCFC-141  
CH3CFCl2   
HCFC-141b**   
C2H3F2Cl   
HCFC-142   
CH3CF2Cl   
HCFC-142b**   
C2H4FCl   
HCFC-151   
C3HFCl6   
HCFC-221  
C3HF2Cl5   
HCFC-222  
C3HF3Cl4   
HCFC-223   
C3HF4Cl3   
HCFC-224   
C3HF5Cl2   
HCFC-225   
CF3CF2CHCl2   
HCFC-225ca** 
CF2ClCF2CHClF 
HCFC-225cb** 
C3HF6Cl   
HCFC-226   
C3H2FCl5   
HCFC-231   
C3H2F2Cl4   
HCFC-232   
VM0016, v2.0 
66 
C3H2F3Cl3   
HCFC-233   
C3H2F4Cl2   
HCFC-234   
C3H2F5Cl   
HCFC-235   
C3H3FCl4   
HCFC-241   
C3H3F2Cl3   
HCFC-242   
C3H3F3Cl2   
HCFC-243   
C3H3F4Cl   
HCFC-244   
C3H4FCl3   
HCFC-251   
C3H4F2Cl2   
HCFC-252   
C3H4F3Cl   
HCFC-253   
C3H5FCl2   
HCFC-261   
C3H5F2Cl   
HCFC-262   
C3H6FCl   
HCFC-271   
** Identifies the most commercially viable substances 
Table A4. Annex F controlled substances – Group I 
Substance  
CHF2CHF2 
HFC-134 
CH2FCF3 
HFC-134a 
CH2FCHF2 
HFC-143 
CHF2CH2CF3 
HFC-245fa 
CF3CH2CF2CH3 
HFC-365mfc 
CF3CHFCF3 
HFC-227ea 
CH2FCF2CF3 
HFC-236cb 
CHF2CHFCF3 
HFC-236ea 
CF3CH2CF3 
HFC-236fa 
CH2FCF2CHF2 
HFC-245ca 
CF3CHFCHFCF2CF3 
HFC-43-10mee 
VM0016, v2.0 
67 
CH2F2 
HFC-32 
CHF2CF3 
HFC-125 
CH3CF3 
HFC-143a 
CH3F 
HFC-41 
CH2FCH2F 
HFC-152 
CH3CHF2 
HFC-152a 
 
 
 
VM0016, v2.0 
68 
APPENDIX 2: CODE OF GOOD 
HOUSEKEEPING12  
To provide additional guidance to facility operators, in May 1992 the Technical Advisory Committee 
prepared a “Code of Good Housekeeping” to outline measures that should be considered to ensure 
that environmental releases of ODS through all media are minimized. This code, updated by the Task 
Force on Destruction Technologies and amended by the Parties at their Fifteenth Meeting, in 2003, is 
also intended to provide a framework of practices and measures that should normally be adopted at 
facilities destroying ODS.  
Not all measures will be appropriate to all situations and circumstances, and nothing specified should 
be regarded as a barrier to the adoption of better or more effective measures where available.  
A 2.1 Pre-delivery  
This refers to measures that may be appropriate prior to any delivery of ODS to a facility.  
The facility operator should generate written guidelines on ODS packaging and containment criteria, 
together with labeling and transportation requirements. These guidelines should be provided to all 
suppliers and senders of ODS prior to agreement to accept such substances.  
The facility operator should seek to visit and inspect the proposed sender’s stocks and arrangements 
prior to movement of the first consignment. This is to ensure awareness on the part of the sender of 
proper practices and compliance with standards.  
A2.2 Arrival at Facility 
This refers to measures that should be taken at the time ODS are received at the facility gate. These 
include an immediate check of documentation prior to admittance to the facility site, coupled with a 
preliminary inspection of the general condition of the consignment. Where necessary, special or “fast-
track” processing and repackaging facilities may be needed to mitigate risk of leakage or loss of ODS. 
Arrangements should exist to measure the gross weight of the consignment at the time of delivery.  
A2.3 Unloading from Delivery Vehicle  
This refers to measures to be taken at the facility in connection with the unloading of ODS. It is 
generally assumed that ODS will normally be delivered in some form of container, drum, or other vessel 
that is removed from the delivery vehicle in total. Such containers may be returnable.  
 
12 Reproduced in full from: TEAP. 2006. “Code of Good Housekeeping”. In Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on 
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. 7th ed. These measures should also be applied to HFCs. 
VM0016, v2.0 
69 
All unloading activities should be carried out in properly designated areas, to which restricted access 
for personnel applies. Areas should be free of extraneous activities likely to lead to, or increase the risk 
of, collision, accidental dropping, and spillage. Materials should be placed in designated quarantine 
areas for subsequent detailed checking and evaluation.  
A2.4 Testing and Verification  
This refers to the arrangements made for detailed checking of the ODS consignments prior to 
destruction.  
Detailed checking of delivery documentation should be carried out, along with a complete inventory, to 
establish that delivery is as advised and appears to comply with expectations.  
Detailed checks of containers should be made both in respect of accuracy of identification labels and 
of physical condition and integrity. Arrangements must be in place to permit repackaging or “fast-track” 
processing of any items identified as defective. Sampling and analysis of representative quantities of 
ODS consignments should be carried out to verify material type and characteristics. All sampling and 
analysis should be conducted using approved procedures and techniques.  
A2.5 Storage and Stock Control  
This refers to matters concerning the storage and stock control of ODS.  
ODS materials should be stored in specially designated areas, subject to the regulations of the relevant 
local authorities. Arrangements should be put in place as soon as possible to minimize, to the extent 
practicable, stock emissions prior to destruction.  
Locations of stock items should be identified through a system of control that should also provide a 
continuous update of quantities and locations as stock is destroyed and new stock delivered. In regard 
to storage vessels for concentrated sources of ODS, these arrangements should include a system for 
regular monitoring and leak detection, as well as arrangements to permit repackaging of leaking stock 
as soon as possible.  
A2.6 Measuring Quantities Destroyed  
It is important to be aware of the quantities of ODS processed through the destruction equipment. 
Where possible, flow meters or continuously recording weighing equipment for individual containers 
should be employed. As a minimum, containers should be weighed “full” and “empty” to establish 
quantities by difference.  
Residual quantities of ODS in containers that can be sealed and are intended to be returned for further 
use may be allowed. Otherwise, containers should be purged of residues or destroyed as part of the 
process.  
VM0016, v2.0 
70 
A2.7 Facility Design  
This refers to basic features and requirements of plant, equipment, and services deployed in the 
facility.  
In general, any destruction facility should be properly designed and constructed in accordance with the 
best standards of engineering and technology and with particular regard to the need to minimize, if not 
eliminate, fugitive losses.  
Particular care should be taken when designing plants to deal with dilute sources such as foams. These 
may be contained in refrigeration cabinets or may be part of more general demolition waste. The area 
in which foam is first separated from other substrates should be fully enclosed wherever possible and 
any significant emissions captured at that stage.  
• 
Pumps: Magnetic drive, sealers, or double mechanical seal pumps should be installed to 
eliminate environmental releases resulting from seal leakage.  
• 
Valves: Valves with reduced leakage potential should be used. These include quarter-turn 
valves or valves with extended packing glands.  
• 
Tank vents (including loading vents): Filling and breathing discharges from tanks and vessels 
should be recovered or vented to a destruction process.  
• 
Piping joints: Screwed connections should not be used and the number of flanged joints 
should be kept to the minimum that is consistent with safety and the ability to dismantle for 
maintenance and repair.  
• 
Drainage systems: Areas of the facility where ODS are stored or handled should be provided 
with sloped concrete paving and a properly designed collection system. Water that is collected 
should, if contaminated, be treated prior to authorized discharge.  
A2.8 Maintenance  
In general, all maintenance work should be performed according to properly planned programs and 
should be executed within the framework of a permit system to ensure proper consideration of all 
aspects of the work.  
ODS should be purged from all vessels, mechanical units, and pipework prior to the opening of these 
items to the atmosphere. The contaminated purge should be routed to the destruction process or 
treated to recover the ODS.  
All flanges, seals, gaskets, and other sources of minor losses should be checked routinely to identify 
developing problems before containment is lost. Leaks should be repaired as soon as possible.  
Consumable or short-life items, such as flexible hoses and couplings, must be monitored closely and 
replaced at a frequency that renders the risk of rupture negligible.  
VM0016, v2.0 
71 
A2.9 Quality Control and Quality Assurance  
All sampling and analytical work connected with ODS, the process, and the monitoring of its overall 
performance should be subject to quality assessment and quality control measures in line with current 
recognized practices. This should include at least occasional independent verification and confirmation 
of data produced by the facility operators.  
Consideration should also be given to the adoption of quality management systems and environmental 
quality practices covering the entire facility.  
A2.10 Training  
All personnel concerned with the operation of the facility (with “operation” being interpreted in its 
widest sense) should have training appropriate to their task. Of particular relevance to the ODS 
destruction objectives is training in the consequences of unnecessary losses and in the use, handling, 
and maintenance of all equipment in the facility. All training should be carried out by suitably qualified 
and experienced personnel and the details of such training should be maintained in written records. 
Refresher training should be conducted at appropriate intervals.  
A2.11 Code of Transportation  
In the interest of protecting the stratospheric ozone layer, it is essential that used ODS and products 
containing ODS are collected and moved efficiently to facilities practicing approved destruction 
technologies. For transportation purposes, used ODS should receive the same hazard classification as 
the original substances or products. In practice, this may introduce restrictions on hazardous waste 
shipment under the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and their Disposal and this should be consulted separately. In the absence of such specific 
restrictions, the following proposed code of transportation for ODS from customer to destruction 
facilities is provided as a guide to help minimize damage caused to the ozone layer as a result of ODS 
transfers. Additional guidance is contained in the United Nations Transport of Dangerous Goods Model 
Regulations.  
It is important to supervise and control all shipments of used ODS and products containing ODS 
according to national and international requirements to protect the environment and human health. To 
ensure that ODS and products containing ODS do not constitute an unnecessary risk, they must be 
properly packaged and labeled. Instructions to be followed in the event of danger or accident must 
accompany each shipment to protect human beings and the environment from any danger that might 
arise during the operation.  
Notification of the following information should be provided at any intermediate stage of the shipment 
from the place of dispatch until its final destination. When making notification, the notifier should 
supply the information requested on the consignment note, with particular regard to:  
1) The source and composition of the ODS and products containing ODS, including the 
customer’s identity 
VM0016, v2.0 
72 
2) Arrangements for routing and for insurance against damage to third parties 
3) Measures to be taken to ensure safe transport and, in particular, compliance by the carrier 
with the conditions laid down for transport by the States concerned 
4) The identity of the consignee, who should possess an authorized center with adequate 
technical capacity for the destruction 
5) The existence of a contractual agreement with the consignee concerning the destruction of 
ODS and products containing ODS 
This code of transportation does not necessarily apply to the disposal of ODS-containing rigid insulation 
foams. The most appropriate way to dispose of such products may be by direct incineration in municipal 
waste incinerators or rotary kiln incinerators.  
A2.12 Monitoring  
The objectives of monitoring should be to provide assurance that input materials are being destroyed 
with an acceptable efficiency generally consistent with the destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) 
recommendations listed in annex II to the [Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer] and that the substances resulting from destruction yield environmentally 
acceptable emission levels consistent with, or better than, those required under national standards or 
other international protocols or treaties.  
As there are as yet no International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards applicable for the 
sampling and analysis of ODS or the majority of the other pollutants listed in annex IV to the [Handbook 
for the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer], where national standards exist 
they should be employed. Further, where national standards exist they may be used in lieu of ISO 
standards provided that they have been the subject of a verification or validation process addressing 
their accuracy and representativeness.  
As ISO develops international standards for pollutants listed in annex IV to the [Handbook for the 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer], the technical bodies charged with 
developing such standards should take note of the existing national standards including those 
identified in appendix F to the report of the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP) of April 
2002 (volume 3, Report of the Task Force on Destruction Technologies) and strive to ensure 
consistency between any new ISO standards and the existing standard test methods, provided that 
there is no finding that those existing methods are inaccurate or unrepresentative.  
Where national standards do not exist, the Technical Advisory Committee recommends adoption of the 
following guidelines for monitoring of destruction processes operating using an approved technology.  
Recognizing that the United States of America Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) methods have 
been the subject of verification procedures to ensure that they are reasonably accurate and 
representative, that they cover all of the pollutants of interest (although not all ODS compounds have 
been the specific subject of verification activities), that they provide a comprehensive level of detail that 
VM0016, v2.0 
73 
should lead to replicability of the methods by trained personnel in other jurisdictions, and that they are 
readily available for reference and downloading from the Internet without the payment of a fee, 
applicable EPA methods as described in appendix F to the 2002 report of TEAP may be employed.  
In the interest of ensuring a common international basis of comparison for those pollutants or 
parameters where ISO standards exist (currently particulates, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and 
oxygen), use of those standards is encouraged, and jurisdictions are encouraged to adopt them as 
national standards or acceptable alternatives to existing national standards.  
The use of EPA or other national standards described in appendix F is also considered acceptable. The 
precedence given to the EPA methods in the present code is based on the relative comprehensiveness 
of the methods available (both in scope and content), and the relative ease of access to those 
methods.  
A2.13 Measurement of ODS  
Operators of destruction facilities should take all necessary precautions concerning the storage and 
inventory control of ODS-containing material received for destruction. Prior to feeding the ODS to the 
approved destruction process, the following procedures are recommended:  
1) The mass of the ODS-containing material should be determined, where practicable. 
2) Representative samples should be taken, where appropriate, to verify that the concentration of 
ODS matches the description given on the delivery documentation.   
3) Samples should be analyzed by an approved method. If no approved methods are available, the 
adoption of United States EPA methods 5030 and 8240 is recommended.  
4) All records from these mass and ODS concentration measurements should be documented and 
kept in accordance with ISO 9000 or equivalent.  
A2.14 Control Systems  
Operators should ensure that destruction processes are operated efficiently to ensure complete 
destruction of ODS to the extent that it is technically feasible for the approved process. This will 
normally include the use of appropriate measurement devices and sampling techniques to monitor the 
operating parameters, burn conditions, and mass concentrations of the pollutants that are generated 
by the process.  
Gaseous emissions from the process need to be monitored and analyzed using appropriate 
instrumentation. This should be supplemented by regular spot checks using manual stack-sampling 
methods. Other environmental releases, such as liquid effluents and solid residues, require laboratory 
analysis on a regular basis.  
The continuous monitoring recommended for ongoing process control, including off-gas cleaning 
systems, is as follows:  
VM0016, v2.0 
74 
1) Measurement of appropriate reaction and process temperatures 
2) Measurement of flue gas temperatures before and after the gas cleaning system 
3) Measurement of flue gas concentrations for oxygen and carbon monoxide 
Any additional continuous monitoring requirements are subject to the national regulatory authority that 
has jurisdiction. The performance of online monitors and instrumentation systems must be periodically 
checked and validated. When measuring detection limits, error values at the 95% confidence level 
should not exceed 20%.  
Approved processes must be equipped with automatic cut-off control systems on the ODS feed system, 
or be able to go into standby mode whenever:  
a) the temperature in the reaction chamber falls below the minimum temperature required to 
achieve destruction. 
b) other minimum destruction conditions stated in the performance specifications cannot be 
maintained.  
A2.15 Performance Measurements  
The approval of technologies recommended by TEAP is based on the destruction capability of the 
technology in question. It is recognized that the parameters may fluctuate during day-to-day operation 
from this generic capability. In practice, however, it is not possible to measure against performance 
criteria on a daily basis. This is particularly the case for situations where ODS only represents a small 
fraction of the substances being destroyed, thereby requiring specialist equipment to achieve detection 
of the very low concentrations present in the stack gas. It is therefore not uncommon for validation 
processes to take place annually at a given facility.  
With this in mind, TEAP is aware that the measured performance of a facility may not always meet the 
criteria established for the technology. Nonetheless, TEAP sees no justification for reducing the 
minimum recommendations for a given technology. Regulators, however, may need to take these 
practical variations into account when setting minimum standards.  
The ODS destruction and removal efficiency13 for a facility operating an approved technology should be 
validated at least once every three years. The validation process should also include an assessment of 
other relevant stack gas concentrations identified in annex II to decision XV/[…] and a comparison with 
maximum levels stipulated in relevant national standards or international protocols/treaties.  
Determination of the ODS destruction and removal efficiency and other relevant substances identified 
in annex IV to the [Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer] 
should also be followed when commissioning a new or rebuilt facility or when any other significant 
 
13 Destruction and removal efficiency has traditionally been determined by subtracting from the mass of a chemical fed into 
a destruction system during a specific period of time the mass of that chemical alone that is released in stack gases and 
expressing that difference as a percentage of the mass of that chemical fed into the system.  
VM0016, v2.0 
75 
change is made to the destruction procedures in a facility to ensure that all facility characteristics are 
completely documented and assessed against the approved technology criteria.  
Tests must be done with known feed rates of a given ODS compound or with well-known ODS mixtures. 
In cases where a destruction process incinerates halogen-containing wastes together with ODS, the 
total halogen load should be calculated and controlled. The number and duration of test runs should be 
carefully selected to reflect the characteristics of the technology.  
In summary, the destruction and removal efficiency recommended for concentrated sources means 
that less than 0.1 gram of total ODS should normally enter the environment from stack-gas emissions 
when 1000 grams of ODS are fed into the process. A detailed analysis of stack test results should be 
made available to verify emissions of halogen acids and polychlorinated dibenzodioxin and 
dibenzofuran (PCDD/PCDF). In addition, a site-specific test protocol should be prepared and made 
available for inspection by the appropriate regulatory authorities. The sampling protocol must report the 
following data from each test:  
1) ODS feed rate 
2) Total halogen load in the waste stream 
3) Residence time for ODS in the reaction zone 
4) Oxygen content in flue gas 
5) Gas temperature in the reaction zone 
6) Flue gas and effluent flow rate 
7) Carbon monoxide in flue gas 
8) ODS content in flue gas 
9) Effluent volumes and quantities of solid residues discharged 
10) ODS concentrations in the effluent and solid residues 
11) Concentration of PCDD/PCDF, particulates, HCl, HF, and HBr in the flue gases 
12) Concentration of PCDD/PCDF in effluent and solids 
 
 
VM0016, v2.0 
76 
APPENDIX 3: TECHNOLOGY SCREENING 
PROCESS14 
The following screening criteria were developed by the UNEP TFDT. Technologies for use by the 
signatories to the Montreal Protocol to dispose of surplus inventories of ODS were assessed on the 
basis of:  
1) destruction and removal efficiency (DRE)  
2) emissions of dioxins/furans  
3) emissions of other pollutants (acid gases, particulate matter, and carbon monoxide)  
4) technical capability  
The first three above refer to technical performance criteria selected as measures of potential impacts 
of the technology on human health and the environment. The technical capability criterion indicates the 
extent to which the technology has been demonstrated to be able to dispose of ODS (or a comparable 
recalcitrant halogenated organic substance such as PCB) effectively and on a commercial scale.  
For convenience, the technical performance criteria are summarized in Table A5. These represent the 
minimum destruction and removal efficiencies and maximum emission of pollutants to the atmosphere 
permitted by technologies that qualify for consideration by the TFDT for recommendation to the Parties 
of the Montreal Protocol for approval as ODS destruction technologies. The technologies must also 
satisfy the criteria for technical capability as defined below.  
Table A5. Summary of technical performance qualifications15 
Performance Qualification 
Unit 
Diluted Sources 
Concentrated Sources 
DRE  
%  
95  
99.99  
PCDDs/PCDFs  
ng-ITEQ/Nm3  
0.5  
0.2  
HCL/CL2  
mg/Nm3  
100