4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology is applicable to project activities that reduce GHG emissions through the 
accelerated retirement of grid-connected CFPPs paired with renewable electricity. 
4.1 
Just Transition 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions related to just transition:   
1) A just transition plan developed in accordance with VMD0061 is available at the time of 
validation of the project description. 
2) The plan in Section 4.1(1) is fully funded through sources other than the revenues 
generated from the sale of Verified Carbon Units (VCUs).  
 
2 Adapted from US Energy Information Administration: 
https://www.eia.gov/tools/glossary/index.php?id=reserve_margin#:~:text=Reserve%20margin%20(operating)%3A%20T
he,a%20percentage%20of%20total%20capability. 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
9 
4.2 
CFPP Retirement 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions related to CFPP retirement: 
3) CFPP construction began prior to 31 December 2021.3  
4) The CFPP is connected to the grid. 
5) Where in a regulated electricity market, the CFPP is owned by either a regulated utility 
or an independent power producer (IPP). 
6) The CFPP has a single long-term (at least 20 years) power purchase agreement (PPA) 
fully executed prior to 31 December 2023:  
a) in a regulated electricity market, with a system operator or a regulated utility off-
taker. 
b) in a deregulated electricity market, with an eligible counterparty with obligations 
as a load-serving entity, such as a distribution company, power trader, government 
agency, or power retailer.  
7) At validation and at the accelerated retirement date, the CFPP has positive annual net 
income after tax over the three most recent years and positive fair value, determined 
using a methodology that meets International Financial Reporting Standards for 
accounting (e.g., IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement). 
8) At validation, where the CFPP is owned by a state-owned utility company, both the utility 
and the host country have a publicly available commitment to not build new CFPPs and 
to not increase existing CFPP capacity in their jurisdiction. 
9) At validation, where the CFPP is owned by an IPP, the IPP has a publicly available 
commitment to not build new CFPPs, and to not increase existing CFPP capacity under 
their control.  
10) The system operator, utility, distribution company, or other government entity (as 
applicable) has issued a letter that confirms the accelerated retirement will not have a 
material negative effect on consumer prices, access to electricity, grid stability, and 
energy supply security, based on a reliability assessment and rate impact analysis. 
11) At validation, the host country’s most recent Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 
includes one or more of the following commitments:4 
 
3This date coincides with the adoption of the Glasgow Climate Pact at the 26th United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change Conference of the Parties (UNFCCC COP 26), which includes the phase-out and phase-down of fossil 
fuel. This threshold is set to prevent the eligibility of new CFPPs that were developed with the expectation that carbon 
finance would be available in the future to enable their retirement (i.e., preventing perverse incentives). The COP26 
outcome is available here: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cma2021_10_add1_adv.pdf  
 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
10 
a) Power sector-wide decarbonization targets, either as absolute targets or intensity-
based, or 
b) Increased share of renewable energy in total electricity mix, either as an absolute 
increase in renewable energy capacity or percentage of renewable energy in the 
grid.  
12) At validation, the host country must have either:  
c) Submitted a Long-Term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development Strategy (LT-
LEDS)5 to the UNFCCC, or 
d) Published a power sector, energy transition, or economy wide decarbonization 
strategy or policy that supports the transition towards a less carbon intensive 
economy.  
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions:  
13) The CFPP is deactivated or repurposed to continue to combust fossil fuels, including co-
firing biomass with coal or gas. 
14) The CFPP is a mine-mouth power plant.  
15) The CFPP is a captive power plant. 
4.3 
Paired Renewable Electricity 
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions related to paired renewable 
electricity: 
16) The project proponent has a plan, available at validation, for pairing the retired CFPP 
generation capacity fully or partially with new renewable electricity generation that: 
a) exports electricity to the grid. 
b) covers at least 10% of the retired CFPP generation capacity on an annual basis at 
the project start date. 
c) covers at least 40% of the retired CFPP generation capacity by the end of the 
initial crediting period.  
17) The renewable electricity pairing plan includes a list of renewable electricity plants that 
are paired to accelerated CFPP retirement including: 
a) name, type, capacity, and location of each renewable electricity power plant, and 
b) planned commercial operations start date. 
 
5 LT LEDS can be accessed here: https://unfccc.int/process/the-paris-agreement/long-term-strategies 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
11 
18) The paired renewable electricity is generated by one or a combination of the following 
sources: 
a) Solar power plant with or without battery energy storage systems (BESS) 
b) On-shore and/or offshore wind power plant with or without BESS 
c) Hydropower plant (run-of-river or individual plant net output capacity limited to 15 
MW)  
d) Geothermal power plant 
e) Tidal/wave power plant 
f) 
Landfill gas power plant 
g) Biogas power plant, including biogas from wastewater treatment 
h) Waste-to-energy (WtE) power plant, including waste incineration 
i) 
Biomass-fired power plant that complies with requirements and procedures 
established for biomass in the most recent version of CDM ACM00066 
Note – Only renewable electricity power plants included in the pairing plan available at 
validation are eligible (i.e., no new paired renewable electricity plants can be added through 
revisions or PD deviations, etc.) . Any design changes to renewable electricity power plants 
included in the pairing plan (e.g., modification to installed capacity) during project execution 
require a project description deviation and reassessment of additionality and the baseline 
retirement date. This does not permit changes of technology (e.g., solar PV instead of wind). 
Note – This methodology aligns with net zero transition and avoids lock-in of fossil fuel 
combustion or other GHG-intensive systems. Projects are not required to conduct further 
assessments regarding compatibility with net zero transition for eligibility.