38 
CP 
Charcoal production 
 
This methodology uses the notation icl (= 1, 2, 3, … Icl) to indicate “initial” (pre-deforestation) 
classes, which are all forest classes; and fcl (= 1, 2, 3, … Fcl) to indicate “final” (post-deforestation) 
classes. All classes (“initial” and “final”) must be listed in Table 6. 
8.1.1.3 Definition of Land Use and Land Cover Change Categories 
Identify all LU/LC change categories that might occur in the project area and leakage belt 
during the project crediting period in both the baseline and project cases. This may be done by 
analyzing a land-use change matrix that combines the LU/LC classes previously defined. 
List the resulting LU/LC change categories in Table 6 and Table 7. 
Table 6: Potential Land Use and Land Cover Change Matrix 
IDcl 
Initial LU/LC class 
i1 
i2 
i… 
In 
Final LU/LC 
class 
f1 
i1/f1 
i2/f1 
i…/f1 
In/F1 
f2 
i1/f2 
i2/f2 
i…/f2 
In/F2 
f… i1/f… 
i2/f… 
i…/f3 
In/F… 
Fn I1/Fn 
I2/Fn 
I…/Fn 
In/Fn 
 
Table 7: List of Land Use and Land Cover Change Categories 
IDct 
Name 
Trend 
in 
Carbon 
Density 
Presence 
in 
Activity in 
Baseline 
Case  
Name 
Trend 
in 
Carbon 
Density 
Presence 
in 
Activity in 
Project 
Case 
LG FW CP 
LG FW CP 
i1/f1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i1/f2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i1/f… 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i2/f1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
39 
IDct 
Name 
Trend 
in 
Carbon 
Density 
Presence 
in 
Activity in 
Baseline 
Case  
Name 
Trend 
in 
Carbon 
Density 
Presence 
in 
Activity in 
Project 
Case 
LG FW CP 
LG FW CP 
i2/f2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i2/f… 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i…/f1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i…/f2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
i…/f… 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
8.1.1.4 Analysis of Historical Land-Use and Land-Cover Change 
Using the data collected in Section 8.1.1.1, divide the reference region in polygons17 
representing the LU/LC classes and LU/LC change categories defined in Sections 8.1.1.2 and 
8.1.1.3. In the project area, LU/LC change analysis is required to exclude any area with forests 
that are less than 10 years old at the project start date. 
Use existing LU/LC or LU/LC change maps where the classes and categories are well described 
in these maps; the same classes and categories may be used in Sections 8.1.1.2 and 8.1.1.3.  
Where processed data of good quality are not available, unprocessed remotely sensed data 
must be analyzed to produce LU/LC maps and LU/LC change maps. Given the heterogeneity of 
methods, data sources and image processing software, LU/LC change detection should be 
performed by trained interpreters. 
Typically, LU/LC change analysis involves pre-processing, interpretation and classification and 
post-processing. 
Pre-processing 
Pre-processing typically includes: 
1) Geometric corrections to ensure that images in a time series properly overlay each 
other and other GIS maps used in the analysis (i.e., for post-classification stratification). 
The average location error between two images should be less than one pixel. 
2) Cloud and shadow removal using additional data (e.g., radar, aerial photographs, field-
surveys) 
 
17 Raster or grid data formats are allowed. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
40 
3) Radiometric corrections may be necessary (depending on the change-detection 
technique used) to ensure that similar objects have the same spectral response across 
multi-temporal datasets. 
4) Reduction of haze, as needed 
See the most recent version of the GOFC-GOLD sourcebook for REDD or consult experts and 
literature for further guidance on pre-processing techniques. 
Duly record all pre-processing steps for later reporting. 
Interpretation and Classification 
Two main categories of change detection exist and may be used (see 2019 Refinements to the 
IPCC 2006 Guidelines, Chapter 3A.2.4): 
1) Post-classification change detection: Two LU/LC maps are generated for two different 
time points and then compared to detect LU/LC changes. The techniques are 
straightforward but are also sensitive to inconsistencies in interpretation and 
classification of LU/LC classes. 
2) Pre-classification change detection: These are more sophisticated approaches to LU/LC 
change detection that require more data pre-processing (i.e., radiometric corrections). 
The basic approach is to compare by statistical methods the ground spectral response 
using two datasets acquired at different dates to detect locations where a change has 
occurred. Different patterns of spectral change are allocated to specific LU/LC change 
categories. This approach is less sensitive to interpretation inconsistencies but the 
methods involved are less straightforward and require access to the original 
unclassified remotely sensed data. 
As several methods are available to derive LU/LC and LU/LC change maps from multi-temporal 
datasets, this methodology does not prescribe any specific method.  
• 
Automated classification methods are preferred because the interpretation is more 
efficient and repeatable than visual interpretation. 
• 
Independent interpretation of multi-temporal images should be avoided (but is not 
forbidden). 
• 
Interpretation is usually more accurate when it focuses on change detection with 
interdependent assessment of two multi-temporal images together. Image 
segmentation followed by supervised object classification may be effective. 
• 
Minimum mapping unit size must not be more than one hectare irrespective of forest 
definition. 
• 
See the most recent version of the GOFC-GOLD sourcebook on REDD or consult experts 
and literature for further guidance on methods to analyze LU/LC change using remotely 
sensed data. 
Duly record all interpretation and classification steps for later reporting. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
41 
Post-processing 
Post-processing includes the use of non-spectral data to further stratify LU/LC classes with 
heterogeneous carbon density into LU/LC classes with homogenous carbon density. Post-
classification stratification may be performed efficiently using GIS. 
LiDAR and other remote sensing technologies. when combined with field-surveys, may be used 
under this methodology. Some forest types (e.g., broadleaved forest, coniferous forests, 
mangroves) may be accurately discriminated using remotely sensed data only. 
For LU/LC classes where further stratification using remote sensing techniques is not possible 
and the classes are likely to encompass a broad range of carbon density classes, further 
stratification should be based on any of the following: 
1) Biophysical criteria (e.g., climate or ecological zone, soil and vegetation type, elevation, 
rainfall, slope, aspect);18 
2) Disturbance indicators (e.g., vicinity to roads; forestry concession areas);  
3) Age (for plantations and secondary forests); 
4) Land management categories (e.g., protected forest, indigenous reserve); and/or 
5) Other criteria relevant to distinguish carbon density classes. 
See the most recent version of the GOFC-GOLD sourcebook for REDD and IPCC (2006) Volume 
4 for further guidance on stratification. The criteria finally used should be reported 
transparently in the PD and referenced to in Table 5. Some iteration between Sections 8.1.1.2, 
8.1.1.3 and this section may be necessary. 
Duly record all post-processing steps for later reporting. 
At the end of Step 3 (Section 8.1.1), the following products must be prepared for the reference 
region (including the project area): 
1) Forest cover maps showing “forest” land and “non-forest” land at different dates over 
the historical reference period. Forest cover maps must be developed for a minimum of 
three distinct years representing the beginning, midpoint and end of the historical 
reference period. All of the following apply to the project’s forest cover maps:  
a) Intervals between forest cover maps should be as similar in duration as data 
availability allows;  
b) To allow for subdivision of the historical reference period into a calibration 
period and a confirmation period, an odd number of forest cover maps must be 
used; and 
c) Good practice in remote sensing analysis must be followed. 
2) A land-use and land-cover map for at least the most recent date (2 years from the 
project start date) depicting the LU/LC classes defined in Section 8.1.1.2.  
 
18 IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National GHG Inventories provides default climate and soil classification schemes in Annex 
3A.5 and guidance on stratifying LU/LC areas in Section 3.3.2. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
42 
3) A deforestation map for each sub-period analyzed. These maps are generated from 
successive forest cover maps and must include the following land cover change 
categories: forest remaining forest, forest to non-forest (deforestation), non-forest 
remaining non-forest, and non-forest to forest. Where possible, the forest to non-forest 
category must be separated into planned and unplanned deforestation to enable 
exclusion of planned deforestation from the reference region as required in Section 
5.1.1. Where relevant, deforestation maps must identify areas of mangrove and peat 
forest. 
4) A land use and land cover change map for at least the most recent period analyzed 
(three to five years) depicting the LU/LC change categories defined in Section 8.1.1.3. 
In most cases, this map will be prepared by combining the Deforestation Map of the 
most recent period (three to five years) with the most recent Land Use and Land Cover 
Map. 
5) A land-use and land-cover change matrix for at least the most recent period analyzed, 
derived from the LU/LC change map or the Deforestation Map and the post-
deforestation land-use data mentioned above, showing activity data for each LU/LC 
change category. See Appendix 5 for an example of an LU/LC change matrix. 
8.1.1.5 Map Accuracy Assessment 
A verifiable accuracy assessment of the maps produced in the previous step is necessary to 
produce a credible estimate of the historical deforestation area.19 The requirements for 
accuracy assessment are: 
1) The accuracy must be estimated on a class-by-class (LU/LC map) and, where 
applicable, category-by-category (LU/LC change map) basis, respectively.  
2) Accuracy must be assessed based on visual sampling of high-resolution imagery as a 
reference. High-resolution (≤5-meter resolution) imagery must be used where available. 
A number of sample points on the map and their corresponding correct classification 
(as determined by ground surveys or interpretation of higher resolution data as 
collected in Section 8.1.5.1) may be used to create an error matrix with the diagonal 
showing the proportion of correct classification and the off-diagonal cells showing the 
relative proportion of misclassification of each class or category into the other class or 
categories. Based on the error matrix (also called confusion matrix), a number of 
accuracy indices may be derived (see e.g., Congalton (1991) and Pontius (2000)). 
3) The minimum overall accuracy of the forest cover map must be 90 percent. 
4) The minimum classification accuracy of each class or category in the land use and land 
cover map and land use and land cover change map, respectively, must be 80 percent. 
Where the classification of a class or category is lower than 80 percent: 
 
19 See Chapter 5 of IPCC 2003 GPG, Chapter 3A.2.4 of IPCC 2006 Guidelines and the most recent version of the GOFC-
GOLD Sourcebook on REDD for guidance on map accuracy assessment. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
43 
a) Consider merging the class/category with other classes/categories;20 or 
b) Exclude from the forest cover map the forest-classes that are causing the 
greatest confusion with non-forest classes according to the error matrix (e.g., 
initial secondary succession and heavily degraded forest may be difficult to 
distinguish from certain types of grassland or cropland, such as agro-forestry 
and silvo-pastoral systems not meeting the definition of “forest”). This implies 
conservatively reducing the area of the forest cover map. 
5) Both commission errors (false detection of a class/category, such as “deforestation”) 
and omission errors (non-detection of actual class/category, such as “deforestation”) 
should be estimated and reported. 
6) Where ground-truthing data are not available for time periods in the past, the accuracy 
may be assessed only at the most recent date for which it is possible to collect ground-
truthing data. 
Where the map accuracy assessment requires merging or eliminating classes or categories 
to achieve the required map accuracy, the definitions in the previous sub-sections must be 
adjusted accordingly. The final maps and the class/category definitions must be consistent. 
8.1.2 Estimation of Land Cover and Land Cover Change Areas 
Estimation of land cover and land cover change areas must not be derived from uncorrected 
pixel counts of land cover or land cover change maps. A bias correction must be applied to the 
area estimates based on the accuracy assessment and using standard best practice methods 
(for example, GFOI Methods and Guidance document, v2.0, page 136, Box 24 or v3.0, page 
185, Box 32). The estimation of land cover and land cover change areas results in mean area 
estimates, each including an uncertainty estimate representing sampling error. as a two-sided 
90 percent confidence interval. The uncertainty estimates must be reported in hectares and as 
a percentage of the area estimate.  
The bias-corrected estimate of the land cover change area must be conservatively discounted 
to reduce the risk of overestimation: 
Conservatively discounted unplanned deforestation area = bias-corrected area 
estimate × (1–discount factor)  
The discount factors must be based on the uncertainty, U%, of the estimate to be discounted 
(i.e., the half-width of the two-sided 90 percent confidence interval as a percentage of the 
mean estimate). The discount factors are given by the following:  
1) Where the uncertainty is less than or equal to 10 percent of the mean, the discount 
factor is zero percent.  
2) The uncertainty must not exceed 20 percent.  
 
20 The tradeoff of merging classes or categories is that carbon estimates will be subject to a higher degree of variability. 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
44 
3) Where the uncertainty is more than 10 percent and less than 20 percent of the mean: 
𝐷𝐹 = (𝑈%/𝑡𝛼=10%) × 𝑡𝛼=66.67 
Where: 
DF  
= 
Discount factor (%)  
U%  
= 
Percentage uncertainty of the area of the reference region classified as  
unplanned deforestation through plot sampling (i.e., the half-width of 
the 90 percent confidence interval as a percentage of the mean 
estimate) (%)  
t  
= 
Values from the t distribution (tα=10% is the t value for the two-sided 90  
percent confidence interval, approximately 1.6449; tα=66.67% is the t 
value for a one-sided 66.67 percent confidence interval, approximately 
0.4307) (dimensionless) 
8.1.2.1 Preparation of a Methodology Annex to the PD 
LU/LC change analysis is an evolving field and will be performed several times during the 
project crediting period. A consistent time series of LU/LC change data must emerge from this 
process. 
In general, the same source of remotely sensed data and data analysis techniques must be 
used within a period for which the baseline is fixed (baseline validity period). However, if 
remotely sensed data have become available from new and higher resolution sources (e.g., 
from a different sensor system) during this period, these may be used where the images based 
on interpretation of the new data overlap the images based on interpretation of the old data by 
at least one year and the images cross calibrate to acceptable levels based on commonly used 
methods in the remote sensing community.  
The risk of introducing artifacts from method change must be minimized to achieve a 
consistent time series. For this reason, the detailed methodological procedures used in pre-
processing, classification, post-classification processing and accuracy assessment of the 
remotely sensed data must be carefully documented in an annex to the PD. This annex must be 
public or sufficient information must be provided in the PD to enable an external reviewer to 
assess the quality of the data. In particular, the following information must be documented: 
1) Data sources and pre-processing:  
a) Type, resolution, source, and acquisition date of the remotely sensed data (and 
other data) used 
b) Geometric, radiometric and other corrections performed, where relevant 
c) Spectral bands and indexes used (such as NDVI) 
d) Projection and parameters used for geo-referencing the images 
e) Error estimate of the geometric correction 
f) Software and software version used to perform pre-processing tasks 
2) Data classification and post-processing:  
a) Definition of the LU/LC classes and LU/LC change categories 
 
VM0015, v1.2 
 
45 
b) Classification approach and classification algorithms 
c) Coordinates and description of the ground-truthing data collected for training 
purposes 
d) Ancillary data used in the classification, where relevant 
e) Software and software version used to perform the classification 
f) Additional spatial data and analysis used for post-classification analysis, 
including class subdivisions using non-spectral criteria, where relevant 
3) Classification accuracy assessment:  
a) Accuracy assessment technique used  
b) Coordinates and description of the ground-truth data collected for classification 
accuracy assessment 
c) Post-processing decisions made based on the preliminary classification 
accuracy assessment, where relevant 
d) Final classification accuracy assessment 
8.1.3 Projection of Future Deforestation (Step 4) 
This step is the core of the baseline methodology. Its objective is to locate in space and time 
the baseline deforestation expected to occur in the reference region during the first baseline 
validity period and, optionally, the project crediting period. 
8.1.3.1 Projection of the Quantity of Future Deforestation 
This section is used to determine the quantity of baseline deforestation (in hectares) for each 
future year within the reference region. 
Where appropriate, the reference region may be stratified according to the findings of Section 
8.1.1 and different deforestation rates estimated for each stratum. Where the reference region 
is stratified, the rationale for the stratification must be explained and a map of the strata 
provided. Briefly summarize the stratification criteria and the strata using Table 8. 
Table 8: Stratification of the Reference Region 
Stratum ID 
Description 
Area at year 
1 
2 
… 
T 
IDi Name 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
 1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 .. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 n 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 IRR   
  
  
  
  
  
 
VM0015, v1.2