7  
QUANTIFICATION OF GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS AND REMOVALS 
Quantification of the reductions, removals and reversals of relevant SS for each of the greenhouses 
gases must be completed by using the baseline and project emissions equations specified for energy 
efficiency and waste diversion activities.  
If the project proponent chooses to exclude any of the sources from the SS selection (Table 3: 
Process for Selection of SS 
), a detailed justification must be provided for each exclusion. 
7.1 
Baseline Emissions 
Emissions Adjusted Baseline EE  
= the energy efficiency activities related baseline emissions plus any adjustments 
needed to adjust it to the conditions of the monitoring period 
Emissions Adjusted Baseline EE  
= Emissions Adjusted Building/System Energy Consumption w/o ECM + Emissions Adjusted Maintenance + 
Emissions Adjusted Unit Operation 
 
Emissions Adjusted Building Energy Consumption w/o ECM  
= 
 
Emissions under SS B7 Adjusted 
Building/System Energy Consumption (w/o 
ECMs) 
 
Emissions Adjusted Maintenance  
= 
 
Emissions under SS B8 Adjusted Maintenance  
 
Emissions Adjusted Unit Operation  
= 
 
Emissions under SS B9 Adjusted Unit 
Operation: Biological/Chemical/Mechanical 
Processes 
Emissions Adjusted Baseline WASTE  
= the waste related baseline emissions plus any adjustments needed to adjust it to 
the conditions of the monitoring period 
Emissions Adjusted Baseline WASTE  
= Emissions Adjusted Energy Consumption from Waste Processing  
+ Emissions Adjusted Waste Decomposition and Methane Release 
 
Emissions Adjusted Energy Consumption from Waste Processing= Emissions under SS B10 Adjusted Energy Consumption from 
Waste Processing 
 
Emissions Adjusted Waste Decomposition and Methane Release= Emissions under SS B14 Adjusted Waste Decomposition and 
Methane Release 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
34 
7.2 
Adjustments 
The project proponent may conduct emission adjustments for measuring functional equivalence as well 
as unit of productivity. The baseline scenario identified for the projects using this methodology may 
require adjustments to ensure functional equivalence with the project.  
In order for this comparison between the project scenario and baseline scenario to be meaningful, the 
project and the baseline must provide the same function and quality of products or services. This 
consistency in metrics and units of production provides an ability to quantify actual emissions reductions 
achieved in the project scenario.  
Table 4 provides SS-specific equations for the baseline component of the comparison. Table 5 provides 
project SS emission adjustment quantification. 
In some cases, the project scenario cannot have the same units as the baseline. An example of this 
would be where the project seeks to displace conventional natural gas with landfill gas. In this case, the 
common metric would be the energy content of each fuel, reported as energy content/liter of fuel4. 
The project proponent is strongly encouraged to review IPMVP volumes for examples of how to make 
adjustments for functional equivalence and productivity. 
The unit of productivity must be used by the project proponent as a basis for incorporating functional 
equivalence within the calculation methodology. Examples of units of productivity could be: energy 
requirements for residential buildings, per square foot of front of house commercial space, per kg/L/m2/m3 
of output from manufacturing facilities, etc. The unit of productivity shall be defined to account for any 
non-production sensitive components. In all cases the project proponent must thoroughly justify their 
assessment of the appropriate unit of productivity.  
The project proponent must also justify the selection of data used for deriving the unit of productivity. 
Functional equivalence adjustments are usually performed when the energy savings are quantified. In 
many cases, the quantification and claims of GHG emission reductions shall occur on a yearly basis; 
therefore, these adjustments need to be performed according to that same schedule. Typical adjustment 
includes routine adjustments and non-routine adjustments as explained below:  
Routine Adjustments of the Baseline  
IPMVP provides the following guidance on performing routine adjustments: “For any energy governing 
factors expected to change routinely during the monitoring period such as weather… a variety of 
techniques can be used to perform the adjustments. Techniques may be as simple as a constant value 
(no adjustment) or as complex as a several multiple parameter non-linear equations, each correlating 
energy with one or more independent variables. Valid mathematical techniques must be used to derive 
                                                          
4   Ibid. 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
35 
the adjustment method.” The quantification of routine baseline adjustments should reflect best practice 
set out in the latest IPMVP volume5.  
 
 
Non-Routine Adjustments of the Baseline  
IPMVP provides examples of non-routine adjustments. The quantification of non-routine baseline 
adjustments should reflect best practice set out in the latest IPMVP volume. 
 
Table 4: Baseline SS Emission Adjustment Quantification  
                                                          
5  IPMVP contains examples of routine and non-routine adjustments.   
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13