3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS document Program Definitions, the following 
definitions apply to this methodology.  
Annual 
A plant species that within one year completes its life cycle, reproduces, and dies. 
Baseline control site 
Defined area that is managed according to pre-project (baseline) practices (as set out in the 
schedule of activities) for direct measurement of baseline soil organic carbon stock change. It 
is linked to and representative of the land in one or more quantification units. Baseline control 
sites may be within or outside of the project area.  
Historical look-back period 
The time period prior to the project start date covering at minimum three years and one 
complete crop rotation. The historical look-back period is used to produce the schedule of 
activities (see definition below). 
Improved agricultural land management practice  
An agricultural practice yielding increased soil organic carbon storage or other climate benefit, 
involving a refinement to fertilizer or other soil amendment application, water 
management/irrigation, tillage, residue management, crop planting and harvesting, and/or 
grazing practices. Projects may implement a single practice or a combined (stacked) practice 
on each field or land part of their project. 
 
2 This tool was deactivated by the CDM as it is no longer required due to methodology improvements (see CDM 
Executive Board Meeting Report 68 from 16–20 July 2012). There were no technical concerns with the procedures 
described in the tool; therefore, it is still valid in the context of VM0042. 
3 This tool was deactivated by the CDM as it is no longer required as a standalone document (see CDM Executive Board 
Meeting Report 75 from 30 September–4 October 2013). There were no technical concerns with the procedures 
described in the tool; therefore, it is still valid in the context of VM0042. 
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 8 
 
 
Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) 
An in-field (in situ) measurement technique based on the detection and analysis of gamma rays 
emitted by soil elements after irradiation with neutrons. It is also known as neutron-stimulated 
gamma ray analysis or spectroscopy.  
Infrared spectroscopy 
Mid-infrared (MIR), near-infrared (NIR), and visible near-infrared (Vis-NIR) spectroscopy, 
including diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) and diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier 
transform spectroscopy (DRIFT). Vis-NIR combines the visible and near-infrared electromagnetic 
range and usually refers to a wavelength range from 350 to 2500 nm (visible range is between 
350 and 700 nm). MIR covers the range between 4000 cm−1 and 600 (or 400) cm−1, 
depending on the instrument.  
Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) 
Application of a high-energy pulse to soil samples to generate a high-temperature plasma, 
which emits radiation at different wavelengths depending on the elements present in the 
sample 
Nitrogen-fixing species 
Any plant species that associates with nitrogen-fixing microbes found within nodules formed on 
the roots, including but not limited to soybeans, alfalfa, and peas 
Organic nitrogen fertilizer  
Any organic material containing nitrogen, including but not limited to animal manure, compost, 
and biosolids 
Perennial  
A plant species whose life cycle, reproduction, and death extends across multiple years 
Professional agronomist 
An individual with specialized knowledge, skills, education, experience, or training in crop 
and/or soil science. Such individuals may be agricultural experts like soil scientists, husbandry 
specialists, agronomists, or representatives of a governmental agricultural body. 
Project domain 
Set of conditions (including crop type, soil texture, and climate) in which model application has 
been validated (see VCS Module VMD0053 Model Calibration, Validation, and Uncertainty 
Guidance for Improved Agricultural Land Management) 
Sample point 
Sample location of undefined area 
Quantification unit 
Defined area within the project for which GHG emission reductions and carbon dioxide 
removals (reductions and removals) are estimated using the selected quantification approach.  
 
VM0042, v2.2 
 9 
 
 
Schedule of activities 
Annual schedule of historical management/activity practices applied in the baseline scenario 
over the historical look-back period (e.g., tillage, planting, harvest, and fertilization events). 
These practices are determined following the data requirements given in Box 1. 
Stratum 
A subset of each quantification unit within which the value of a variable, and the processes 
leading to change in that variable, are relatively homogenous.  
Synthetic nitrogen fertilizer  
Any fertilizer made by chemical synthesis (solid, liquid, gaseous) and containing nitrogen. This 
may be a single nutrient fertilizer product (only including N), or any other synthetic fertilizer 
containing N, such as multi-nutrient fertilizers (e.g., N–P–K fertilizers) and “enhanced-
efficiency” N fertilizers (e.g., slow release, controlled release, and stabilized N fertilizers). 
Woody perennials  
Trees and shrubs having a life cycle lasting more than two years, excluding cultivated annual 
species with lignified tissues, such as cotton or hemp