4  
APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to project activities which install EV charging systems, including their 
associated infrastructure, in order to charge EV applicable fleets whose GHG emission reductions 
are achieved through the displacement of conventional fossil fuel vehicles used for passenger 
and freight transportation as a result of the electricity delivered by project chargers. 
                                                 
weight limit, consistent with the IHS Markit data sources applied in the development of the default factors. This 
14,000lbs GVWR values is based upon definitions used and supplied by IHS Markit data for light duty vehicles, 
whose data forms the basis for most US EV market analysis publications. Commercial applications in the 8500-14000 
lb Class 2b and 3 are a de minimis proportion of total LDV’s. See also: http://changingears.com/rv-sec-tow-vehicles-
classes.shtml  and https://www.afdc.energy.gov/data/10380 Lighter MDV’s include the types of vehicles which also 
use the main LDV charging networks (e.g., retirement home vans). 
8 For countries using other metrics (e.g., ratings in Europe for CO2 per km), conversion guidance is given in Section 8 
below. 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
9
Projects must comply with all applicability conditions set out below: 
1) The applicable fleets of projects applying this methodology are limited to all LDV BEVs 
and PHEVs9, and HDV EVs. For LDV projects, these applicable fleets comprise10 BEVs 
and PHEVs for L1 and L2 chargers, and BEVs for DCFCs. For HDV projects, these 
applicable fleets comprise MDV/HDV electric buses and trucks, both BEV and PHEV, 
eligible to charge at the project’s set of EV charging systems.  
2) Project proponents must demonstrate that the EV models comprising the applicable fleet 
of the project are comparable to their conventional fossil fuel baseline vehicles using the 
following means: 
 
Project and baseline vehicles belong to the same vehicle category (e.g., car, 
motorcycle, bus, truck, LDV, MDV, HDV); 
 
Project and baseline vehicles have comparable passenger/load capacity 
(comparing the baseline vehicle with the respective project vehicle). 
Note that where project proponents apply the baseline emission default factors for MPG 
and AFEC determined for the US and Canada, this comparability requirement between 
applicable and comparable fleet models has already been completed and satisfied. 
3) In order to demonstrate that double counting of emission reduction will not occur, the 
project proponent must maintain an inventory of EV chargers included in the project, 
including their L1/L2/DCFC classifications and unique identifiers; other measures may 
include disclosure of credit ownership to EV drivers. Double counting relative to any 
issued GHG credits11 from projects that introduce EV fleets12 will be addressed using the 
emission reduction discount adjustments in Section 8.4 below13. Where associated 
infrastructure and/or renewable power (on-site and/or direct transmission) are included in 
an EV charging system, this must be referenced and described in the charging system’s 
inventory. Project documentation must also include the following for each EV charger: 
 
Classification using the performance voltage, AC/DC basis and kw power 
specifications given for L1, L2 and DCFC 50/100/150/320/500 definitions 
                                                 
9 Hybrid-only vehicles, which do not have batteries capable of receiving electricity to propel their motion, are not 
eligible under this methodology 
10 There may be a very few PHEVs which also have the plug capability to charge at DCFCs (e.g., Mitsubishi 
Outlander); these are considered de minimis. Similarly, the BMW i3 REX (with range extender) is technically a PHEV, 
but only 5% of i3s use the range extender in practice. Moreover, Argonne National Laboratory and California classify 
the REX as a BEV, and therefore it is included in the BEV category for default factor calculation purposes in this 
methodology.   
11 Credits for GHG emission reductions issued by a GHG program such as the American Carbon Registry (ACR) 
Climate Action Reserve (CAR), Verified Carbon Standard (VCS), or the UNFCCC’s Clean Development Mechanism 
(CDM). 
12 For example, projects that apply CDM methodology AMS.III.C. 
13 Double counting related to any jurisdictional emission trading systems or commitments (e.g., cap-and-trade 
programs, etc.) must still be assessed per the VCS rules.  
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
10
 
Unique identifiers, including the geo-spatial coordinates and one other unique 
reference such as NEMA codes, customer codes, equipment serial numbers, 
charger ID codes, or AFDC ID codes 
4) This methodology is applicable to EV charging systems utilizing AI to provide electricity to 
and from EVs, on-site batteries and renewables14 under the condition that the AI must 
include adequate metering systems (e.g., meters/sub-meters and/or associated 
measurement systems). These metering systems must measure and accurately trace all 
electricity deliveries and receipts from all such interrelated associated infrastructure 
sources. This includes electricity sourced from/returned to the grid, dedicated renewable 
energy generated on-site (including RE sourced from direct transmission lines), on-site 
storage batteries, and/or the EV’s on-board battery.   
5) Projects with estimated annual emission reductions of over 60,000 tCO2e15 (large-scale) 
are permitted where project proponents can demonstrate that the project is located in a 
country with credible national data sources for GHG emission calculations. Otherwise, 
projects are limited to annual emission reductions equal to or under 60,000 tCO2e (small-
scale). Projects located in Annex I and II countries, and countries referenced by EIA data 
sources, are automatically eligible to be of any scale. All regions listed in module 
VMD0049 Activity Method for Determining Additionality of Electric Vehicle Charging 
Systems meet these criteria and thus are not limited in scale. 
6) Project proponents must demonstrate proof of ownership of emission reductions which 
may be achieved through the following: 
 
With the charging system owners through contractual agreements, terms of 
service, utility program participation rules, or other means, and/or 
 
With EV drivers through disclosure of credit ownership (e.g., through dispenser 
notices, screen displays, terms of service, etc.).