10 REFERENCES 
Portland cement Association (2023). Environmental Product Declaration for Portland 
Cement.  https://www.cement.org/wp-
content/uploads/2024/07/pca_epd_portland_athena_final_revised_nov2023-1.pdf  and 
UK Average Portland Cement; Mineral Products Association (MPA) UK (2022). 
https://cement.mineralproducts.org/MPACement/media/Cement/Publications/2017/EPD_
UK_Average_Portland_Cement_04-2022.pdf 
 
S J Kemp, D Wagner and I Mounteney (2010).  “Low Level Detection of Carbonate Species 
Using Thermogravimetric and Differential Thermal Analysis.” British Geological Survey. 
 
Neupane, Debendra, et al. (2015).  “Distribution of mineralized carbonate and its 
quantiﬁcation method in enzyme mediated calcite precipitation technique”.  ScienceDirect. 
 
US Geological Survey. Data on cement production in the United States. 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-cement.pdf 
 
European Ready Mix Concrete Association. (2019). Ready Mix Concrete Industry Statistics. 
https://ermco.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/ERMCO-Statistics-Report-2019-July-2020-
FINAL.pdf 
 
Lafarge-Holcim annual report. (2023). 
https://www.holcim.com/investors/publications/annual-report-2023  
 
ASTM C39 - Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete 
Specimens; Global - ACI 214R-11 Guide to Evaluation of Strength Test Results of Concrete; 
Global - ACI 214.4R-10 Guide for Obtaining Cores and Interpreting Compressive Strength 
Results Europe EN 12390-3:2019 Testing hardened concrete.  
 
H.-W. Häring, ed. (2008), Industrial gases processing, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 
Weinheim.     
 
Monkman, S. (2018). Sustainable Ready Mixed Concrete Production Using Waste CO2: A 
Case Study. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339106379_Sustainable_Ready_Mixed_Concret
e_Production_Using_Waste_CO2_A_Case_Study 
 
In: SP-330 Proceedings Fourteenth International Conference: Recent Advances in Concrete 
Technology and Sustainability Issues, American Concrete Institute, Beijing, China, pp. 163–
174. https://www.concrete.org/store/productdetail.aspx?ItemID=SP330. 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
42 
 
2024 US Merchant CO2 Report, the largest source of CO2 is from ethanol plants (36%).  
Hydrogen refining and ammonia production are also significant sources of CO2 supply. 
 
Huntzinger, D., et al. (2009). A Life-Cycle Assessment of Portland Cement Manufacturing: 
Comparing the Traditional Process with Alternative Technologies, Journal of Cleaner 
Production. 
 
US EPA Center for Corporate Climate Leadership. Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2020-04/documents/ghg-
emission-factors-hub.pdf  
 
Roozbeh Feiz, et. al. Improving the CO2 Performance of Cement, Part I: Utilizing Life-Cycle 
Assessment and Key Performance Indicators to Assess Development Within the Cement 
Industry, Linkoping University Post Print.   
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
43 
APPENDIX I: ACTIVITY METHOD 
The concept of using greenhouse gases as a raw material for the production of useful products is 
only a few years old. A number of start-up companies are developing technologies that use captured 
GHGs to produce tangible products, with what has been termed “Carbon Capture and Utilization” 
(CCU). Products created through CCU processes can act as long-term storage of the captured GHGs 
used in their production and displace products created through conventional processes. The level of 
commercial activity for CCU products is very low, as it is a new technology.  
Per the VCS rules, Verra will reassess whether the activity penetration levels remain within the 
permitted threshold within three years of the initial approval of the methodology. At that time, Verra 
will base its assessment on national boundaries, focusing on countries where concrete production 
utilizes CO2 sequestration. Also, and in the spirit of conservativeness, where sub-national 
regulations or policies may impact the likelihood of the project activity being implemented, Verra 
may use such boundaries as the basis of the reassessment of the activity penetration rate. 
In the case of CO2 sequestration in the production of concrete, the only baseline scenarios that are 
reasonable to consider are (1) the continued manufacturing of concrete with no production involving 
CO2 sequestration, or perhaps (2) the large-scale adoption of this technology many years into the 
future, at which point if the 5% activity penetration threshold (see below) is exceeded, this activity 
method would no longer be eligible to continue.  
CCU technology – whether it is locking captured CO2 into solid materials or liquid fuels – is still in its 
infancy, as illustrated by the Carbon XPrize12, a competition similar to the Ansari XPrize 
(incentivizing reusable spacecraft technology) and designed to incentivize the CCU industry. The 
mere existence of the Carbon XPrize illustrates the lack of any mature CCU sector. A number of 
start-up companies are working on sequestering CO2 into plastics, concrete, carbon nanotubes and 
other solids, though most of these companies are pre-commercial or just reaching commercial 
scale. Those that have begun commercial production have very low penetration rates in their 
respective target markets. Because these CCU technologies are so new, the level of adoption is 
close to zero.    
As of the writing of this methodology, there is no large-scale commercial application of the technology 
to capture and sequester CO2 in concrete. There is limited activity in sequestering GHGs in concrete 
and other similar building materials. Some of the companies include CarbonCure, Partanna and 
CarbiCrete. 
Best estimates at the time of writing indicate that CarbonCure sequesters the most CO2 by volume in 
concrete.  In 2024, CarbonCure’s technology was used in 16.1 million cubic yards of ready-mix and 
pre-cast concrete – compared to an average of 18.3 billion cubic yards of concrete poured globally 
per year (approximately 0.088% of the market by volume).13 Other companies, such as Partanna and 
CarbiCrete, are in the early stages of commercialization. While this is likely to change over time, the 
 
12 See https://carbon.xprize.org/prizes/carbon 
13 https://gccassociation.org/concretefuture/cement-concrete-around-the-world 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
44 
fact that the Carbon XPrize is so focused on helping these companies is an indication of how early-
stage these markets are.   
In addition, it should be noted that as of the writing of this methodology, CarbonCure’s technology has 
been available for more than six years, demonstrating that while the project is commercially available 
at a modest scale, its growth has been limited – indicating barriers to penetration in the wider market.  
Some of these barriers include: 
• 
Regulatory: Engineering approval of concrete mixes is required for commercial buildings on 
a case-by-case basis. This limits the volume that producers can create using innovative 
types of concrete and requires interaction with major engineers/architects within each 
geographic region to remove barriers to implementation. There are limited region-specific 
policies that promote the use of CO2-mineralization on a large scale, and no state level or 
federal level regulation or legislation that requires its use.  In short, producers can view CO2-
containing concrete as a 'nice to have' rather than a 'need to have'.  
• 
Time Burden: Quality control processes require up to six months to 'normalize' addition of 
CO2-mineralization equipment to the manufacturing process (for new plants). This 
represents additional costs that many producers – particularly smaller ones – will most 
likely not want to incur.  
• 
Market Fragmentation/Current Practice: The concrete manufacturing industry is extremely 
fragmented. This represents additional barriers to implementation as each company must 
be engaged with on an individual basis. An IBISWorld Report outlines that even the largest 
producers rarely control more than 10% of the overall market.  Many producers own one or 
two plants. 
 
Positive List 
This methodology uses Option A: Activity Penetration (AP) to determine additionality. Under this 
option, a methodology must demonstrate that the project activity has achieved a low level of 
penetration relative to its maximum adoption potential (MAP). AP is determined by dividing the 
observed adoption (OA) of the project activity by the project activity’s MAP.  
MAP is defined as “the total adoption of a project activity that could currently be achieved given 
current resource availability, technological capability, level of service, implementation potential, 
total demand, market access and other relevant factors within the methodology’s applicable 
geographically defined market.” In this case, the MAP is defined as all sales and use of concrete 
globally. In order to qualify as additional, the project AP can be no higher than 5%. In this case, the 
project activity has not reached true commercial scale.  To determine the total market size, the best 
metric would be the volume of global ready-mix and pre-cast concrete production. As referenced 
above, CarbonCure’s technology penetration, which accounts for a majority of market penetration 
for CO2 sequestration in concrete, accounts for approximately 0.088% of market penetration by 
volume. 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
45 
Therefore, the activity penetration level of the project activity covered by this methodology is clearly 
below the five percent threshold, and the project activity may be deemed additional. 
 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
46 
APPENDIX II: TESTING PROCEDURES TO 
DETERMINE BASELINE CEMENT 
QUANTITY 
Testing procedures will be established by project proponents at either a lab or the company’s plants) that 
measure quantities of cement needed to produce concrete with equivalent compressive strength 
both with and without the project processes to establish a ratio of Project Scenario: Baseline 
Scenario cement use. The test batches will yield the equivalent or better levels of compressive 
strength (or have the project-level mix have a greater strength than the baseline). In the case of 
testing dry-cast concrete, test batches can include samples of the finished precast product. These 
tests will determine how much cement would have been used in the baseline design mix to achieve 
the equivalent or better level of compressive strength as the project design mix.  The result will be a 
calculation of how much cement is used per unit of concrete in the baseline scenario and the 
project scenario.  This can then be applied to all project concrete or concrete products produced 
with that mix design. Baseline quantities of cement and project-level quantities must go through a 
testing procedure for each project or product mix design. The test batches must yield the equivalent 
or better levels of compressive strength (or have the project level mix have a greater strength than 
the baseline). The procedures are outlined in detail below. 
For concrete products, there may be a range of functional equivalence tests as outlined in ASTM 
Volume 04.02: Concrete and Aggregates. 
 
Determining QCement,p,i,test n 
QCement,p,i,test n must be determined by measuring the quantity of cement used to prepare project 
compressive strength (or other measures of functional equivalence relevant to specific pre-cast 
products) for test specimen n based on project mix design i, where the measurement of the quantity 
of cement and preparation, curing, and testing of the test specimen meets the requirements of the 
ASTM or CSA concrete standard test method or match the equivalent or better level for compressive 
strength relevant in the baseline for the type of concrete in question14. For each project mix design, 
a minimum of three batches must be tested and the three tests should fall within the relevant ASTM 
standards measure for functional equivalence. For product mix designs, a minimum of 3 units 
should be tested from 3 different batches. In all cases, the number of batches and specimens 
tested must meet or exceed the requirements of the relevant ASTM or CSA standard test method. 
This determination (for both QCement,b,i,test n and QCement,p,i,test n) needs only be done once during the 
project crediting period for a given project mix design, but should be repeated for relevant project 
mix designs.  
 
14 See: ASTM C39 - Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete Specimens 
Global - ACI 214R-11 Guide to Evaluation of Strength Test Results of Concrete 
Global - ACI 214.4R-10 Guide for Obtaining Cores and Interpreting Compressive Strength Results 
Europe EN 12390-3:2019 Testing hardened concrete. Compressive strength of test specimens 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
47 
If project proponents have a large number of design mixes at a given project site or across a 
portfolio of locations, testing can be performed on a company’s mix designs that comprise at least 
50% of production volume.   
 
Determining QCement,b,i,test n 
QCement,b,i,test n must be determined by measuring the quantity of cement used to prepare baseline 
compressive strength test (or other measure of functional equivalence relevant to specific pre-cast 
products) for specimen n based on a mix design that is intended to result in a concrete of 
equivalent compressive strength to project mix design i, where the measurement of the quantity 
and preparation, curing, and testing of the test specimens are identical to what is used for the 
determination of QCement,p,i,test n. The mix design used must include the same amount of SCMs, if any, 
added at the concrete facility (excluding any SCMs in blended cement provided by a cement 
supplier) per m3 of concrete as in the project mix design.  
 
Test specimens must all be of the same volume, and equal to the volume of the specimens used to 
determine QCement,p,i,test n. The same number of specimens across the same number of batches as 
tested for QCement,p,i,test n must be tested. In instances where specific pre-cast products do not utilize 
compressive strength as a metric, project proponents will ascertain and apply the appropriate ASTM 
code equivalent tests for these products.  For concrete products using compressive strength testing, 
baseline test specimens must have an average 28-day compressive strength that is equal to or less 
than the average 28-day compressive strength determined for the project test specimens used in 
determining QCement,p,i,test n. Where the average baseline test specimen compressive strength is 
greater than the average project test specimen compressive strength after completing at least three 
tests for a given mix design, the project proponent or concrete producer will conduct additional 
testing of either the project or baseline mix design (discarding an equivalent number of initial test 
specimen results for either the project or baseline as applicable) until the average project 
compressive strengths is equal to or greater than the baseline level strength. Provided below is an 
example of 28-day compressive strength data for reference or baseline concrete mix (control) and a 
reduced cement concrete mix produced with CO2. 
If project proponents have a large number of design mixes at a given project site or across a 
portfolio of locations, testing can be performed on a company’s mix designs that comprise 50% or 
more of production volume.   
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
48 
 
Two mixes are compared in the graph above. The reference mix contains 470 lbs of cement, 120 lbs 
of fly ash and 350 lbs of slag per cubic yard. The cement content was reduced 20% for CO2 mix to 
378 lbs per cubic yard. The reference concrete data comprised of numerous tests, with an average 
28-day compressive strength of 9,906 psi and a standard deviation of 1,560 psi. The CO2 set was 
also comprised of multiple tests, with an a with an average 28-day compressive strength of 9,932 
psi and a standard deviation of 1,431 psi.  Because the post-project concrete has a compressive 
strength equal to or greater than the baseline concrete, this requirement in the methodology is met.  
Cases when testing is not done on all mix designs: In instances where there is a large number of 
mix designs and testing is completed for at least 50% of production volume for a producer, the 
following is applied. A) For the mix designs that testing was conducted for, the results of the 
testing data is used to quantify the cement cut; or B) For the mix designs that testing was not 
conducted for, project proponents will use the average cement cut from all the mix designs that 
testing was completed for but apply a 1 standard deviation deduction.  For example, if mix design 
A (5% cement cut), mix design B (4.5% cement cut) and mix design C (4.0% cement cut) have the 
relevant tests completed and make up 50% of the production volume for a producer, the average 
of the mixes (4.5% cement cut) minus one standard deviation (0.005) comes out to (4.0% cement 
cut). The 4.0% cement cut value can be applied for all mix designs in that monitoring period that 
have not been tested, the tested values for the other mix designs are used for them. Removing a 
standard deviation ensures that the approach is conservative, and that the flexibility in testing 
ensures that the process is feasible and scalable in instances where there are a large number of 
mix designs.  Note in instances where there is only one mix design for a producer the coefficient 
of variance is used, this is simply the standard deviation of the project samples divided by the 
average value and applies the same approach noted above. 
Three Point Curves: Three Point Curves are common with concrete producers.  A three-point curve is 
a simple way, to obtain a relationship between one factor that is varied to 3 different levels and a 
 4,000
 6,000
 8,000
 10,000
 12,000
 14,000
 16,000
Frequency
28d compressive strength (psI)
Control
CO2
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
49 
measured result using the least number of experiments.  All other factors are kept constant. For 
concrete mixtures the three-point curve is used to establish mixture proportions for selected project 
requirements.15 A concrete mix is generally not static over the course of a year in most climates, so 
the cement content will be adjusted up and down depending on the season and the weather on 
certain days.  The mixes may vary slightly on a humid day compared to a dry day, for example.  
Concrete producers thus complete a three-point curve in their lab with the same mix design at three 
different water/cement (w/c) ratios, creating a linear line that decreases as the w/c increases 
(strength goes down as w/c goes up).  Such testing can be allowed under this methodology for 
project mixes, which can then be compared to the appropriate baseline design mix.  Without the 
ability to use three-point curves, depending on when the baseline is established, the CO2 mix may 
have more cement than the baseline but less than the equivalent mix at that time of year. The 
figure below provides an illustration of this concept; in this instance, the three points on the non-air 
entrained concrete line are those at 7120 psi, 4200 psi, and 2250 psi along the line. 
The figure below provides an illustration of this concept, in this instance the three points on the 
non-air entrained concrete line are those at 7120 psi, 4200 psi and 2250 psi along the line.   
 
 
Approach to Defining and Categorizing Individual Mix Designs 
In many cases, there can be small and immaterial changes in the “recipes” of specific mix 
designs at an individual concrete plant, and thus it’s not practical to test them all.  In the 
PD, project proponents should provide transparent criteria and reasoning for how to 
categorize different design mixes.  If there is a mix in which these criteria change beyond a 
certain level as specified in the PD, this would constitute a new mix design and thus require 
separate compressive strength and carbon-content testing.  Examples would include but not 
 
1515 See https://www.nrmca.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Tip7w.pdf 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
50 
be limited to: (1) changes in SCM type of percent content; (2) different type of cement used; 
(3) different requirements for compressive strength or different application (pavement, 
blocks, columns); or (4) material changes in other ingredients such as admixtures and 
aggregates.   
The figure below lists a theoretical categorization of different design mixes.  For example, if 
the SCM content in one concrete mix was 15%, but a slightly altered mix brings this level to 
20%, it would be within the same mix.  But if that SCM level goes above 30%, that would 
represent a new mix.  In the PD, project developers should present transparent reasoning 
for why the “borders” from one design mix to the next are set where they are.   
The example below separates mix designs based on their criteria (design strength (psi), 
cement type (e.g., type I/II), % SCMs, blend of aggregates (e.g., coarse+fine), strength 
enhancing admixtures (e.g., Xseed).  For example, a concrete mix that had 20% SCM, had a 
strength of 3,000 PSI, used a Type III Cement, used only one aggregate and a certain 
admixture would be one mix design.  But if the SCM level went to 30% and everything else 
stayed the same, it would be considered a separate mix design.  Using these five different 
categories and the number of “buckets” in each, a total of 108 possible unique 
combinations can be part of this project.  Thus, there would be 108 potential design mixes. 
 
 
 
 
 
VM0043, v1.1  
 
51 
APPENDIX III: EMISSIONS FACTOR OF 
CEMENT USING REGIONAL FACTORS 
 
The factors in Table A1 include emissions from the chemical process of calcination and emissions 
from fuel combustion, and consider those facilities that combust a wide range of carbon intensive 
and biogenic fuel sources.  Table A2 shows the typical ratio of clinker-to-cement on a regional basis 
throughout the world.  These tables were sourced from VM0031 and derived from the Cement 
Sustainability Initiative report, Cement Industry Energy and CO2 Performance “Getting the Numbers 
Right” (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). 
Table A1: CO2 emissions per tonne of clinker per kiln type (global average) 
Kiln Type 
EFClinker (kg CO2/t clinker) 
Dry with preheater and precalciner 
842 
Dry with preheater and without precalciner 
861 
Dry without preheater 
955 
Semi wet/Semi dry 
896 
Wet 
1043 
 
Table A2: Ratio of Clinker to Cement on a Regional Basis 
Region 
Clinker to Cement Ratio (%) 
Africa and Middle East 
79 
Asia excluding China, India, CIS and Japan 
84 
China and India