114 
E 
Demand price elasticity. 
See Tables 18 
and 19 Below 
CN 
Carbon sequestration reversal per unit of harvest from the non-
reserved forest.  Expressed in tC. 
CR 
Carbon sequestration per unit of (forgone) harvest gained by 
preserving the reserved forest.  Expressed in tC. 
F 
The “preservation” parameter. This is the ratio of timber supply 
being set aside for the offset project (quantity QR) to the timber 
supply outside the offset area (quantity QN). The ratio can be 
represented as 
G"
G# and can be thought of as the market share of 
the timber in the offset project.   
Γ 
The “substitution” parameter.  A parameter introduced into the 
referenced leakage equation to take into account specialty woods 
(ie, the degree to which a particular HWP can be substituted for 
another). 
When using this equation to derive project-specific leakage estimates, it is recommended that 
project proponents within the province of BC base their calculations on the variable values shown 
in the Provincial Base Case Approach for Estimating Leakage (Appendix A) for supply price 
elasticity (e), demand price elasticity (E), and the carbon sequestration values (CN and CR) 
(shown below in Table 18).  The sources for these values are shown in Appendix A. 
Table 18: Recommended Values for Estimating Project Specific Leakage 
Variable description 
Base Case 
Equation 
Values 
Rationale 
Supply price elasticity. 
e = 0.342 
 
Market supply and demand elasticities are very 
difficult to estimate and require considerable amounts 
of relevant and credible background data.  For the 
majority of cases, project proponents will be 
extremely challenged to compile the data required to 
estimate appropriate elasticities.  In addition there is 
a risk the elasticities developed or referenced by a 
proponent could be either derived and/ or applied 
inappropriately (ie, elasticities that do not adequately 
represent the market(s) associated with the offset 
project).  The elasticities used in the BC Provincial 
Base Case approach, and given here,  are 
considered the best representation of current market 
Demand price elasticity 
E = -0.181 
 
METHODOLOGY: VCS Version 3   
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
115 
conditions and are based on statistically significant 
results from long-run data sets.  The derivation of 
these variables are predicated more on total/ overall 
market supply and demand factors, and less on 
project specific factors.  As a result, in terms of 
applying a consistent approach and to streamline 
validation requirements it is recommended that the 
referenced elasticities are used  
Carbon sequestration per unit of 
(forgone) harvest gained by 
preserving the reserved forest. 
CR = 1 
This is a conservative assumption.  In favourable 
growing conditions Tit would not be unreasonable to 
assume that CR > CN. As the gap between CR and CN 
increases in favour of CR leakage will decrease.  
However it is difficult/ impossible to predict the area 
of North America the leakage will be in, and therefore 
just as difficult to define a CN value.   
Carbon sequestration reversal per 
unit of harvest from the non-
reserved forest. 
CN = 1 
In order to tailor leakage estimates to reflect a specific project market leakage case, it is 
recommended that proponents focus on developing their own project specific parameters to 
reflect the preservation parameter (F) and the substitutability parameter (γ).  
Table 19: Variables Recommended to be Developed by Project Proponents for Estimating Project 
Specific Leakage Estimates 
Variable description 
Equation 
Variable 
Rationale 
Preservation parameter –  
The ratio of timber supply being set 
aside for the offset project to the 
timber supply outside the offset area 
and can be thought of as the market 
share of the timber in the offset 
project. 
F 
As projects will vary in size and correspondingly to 
the market share of timber in the offset area, the 
preservation parameter can be derived to reflect 
the specific size of a project.  This co-efficient has a 
minimal effect in the leakage equation but if 
estimated appropriately can offer a more specific 
overall leakage estimate for any given project. 
Substitution Parameter –  
  A parameter introduced into the 
referenced leakage equation to take 
into account specialty woods. 
γ 
For specialty woods with few substitutes, such as 
cedar, leakage is likely lower than for other readily 
substitutable woods.   
Proponents who can demonstrate that specialty 
woods are prevalent in their project area can utilize 
the substitutability parameter to reflect this and 
develop a more project specific leakage estimate.  
Otherwise, the default values provided in Appendix 
A: A Provincial BC Base Case Approach For 
 
METHODOLOGY: VCS Version 3   
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
116 
Addressing Leakage from Forest Carbon Projects 
must be utilized, considering projects located within 
the province of BC. 
 Method for deriving a preservation parameter (F) 
The preservation parameter (F) represents the ratio of timber set aside for the offset project 
(quantity QR) to the timber supply outside the offset area (quantity QN). The ratio can be 
represented as 
G"
G# and can be thought of as the market share of the timber in the offset project. 
The purpose of this ratio is to determine how difficult it will be to replace the preserved timber. 
Small amounts of preserved timber are easier to replace than large amounts. 
A 1% (.01) preservation parameter has been used in the BC provincial base cases. This is in line 
with Murray et al.’s general calculations. This value is used since it is unlikely that any project will 
alter harvest rates by more than 1% of the total North American market for the specific 
commodity. Furthermore, this value has minimal impact on the leakage calculation. As such, a 
preservation parameter of 1% is adequate for the leakage calculations, and proponents can use 
this value. 
Proponents are free to calculate their own preservation parameter, if they choose. To do this 
calculation the quantity of preserved lumber (QR) will be equal to the amount of harvestable 
timber (m3) being claimed on the proponent’s project verification. The remaining supply of timber 
(QN) will be the five year average annual total timber harvest in North America for the most recent 
period.  
Preservation parameter  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equation 42 
Φ = 
}2
}3                          [42] 
Where: 
 
Parameter Description 
Default 
Value 
Φ 
The “preservation” parameter. This is the ratio of timber supply being set aside 
for the offset project (quantity QR) to the timber supply outside the offset area 
(quantity QN). The ratio can be represented as 
G"
G# and can be thought of as the 
market share of the timber in the offset project.   
N/A 
 
METHODOLOGY: VCS Version 3   
v3.3