8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
Baseline emissions are calculated as follows: 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑦= ∑𝐸𝐶𝑖,𝑦× 𝑁𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 𝑛𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× (𝐸𝐹𝑏,𝑖,𝐶𝑂2 × 𝑓𝑁𝑅𝐵,𝑦+ 𝐸𝐹𝑏,𝑖,𝑛𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑂2)
𝑖,𝑗,𝑘
 
(1) 
Where: 
BEy 
= Baseline emissions during year y (t CO2e) 
ECi,y 
= Average energy consumption of baseline device type i in year y (TJ) 
Nj,k,y 
= Number of commissioned project devices of type j from batch k in year y 
nj,k,y 
= Proportion of commissioned project devices of type j from batch k that 
remain operating in year y (fraction) 
EFb,i,CO2 
= CO2 emission factor for fuel used by baseline device type i in the baseline 
scenario (t CO2/TJ) 
fNRB,y 
= Fraction of woody biomass that is established to be non-renewable used by 
baseline device in year y; this variable is not considered for fossil fuels 
(fraction) 
EFb,i,nonCO2 
= Non-CO2 emission factor for fuel used by baseline device type i in the 
baseline scenario (t CO2e/TJ) 
i 
= Baseline device type and its respective fuel type 
j 
= Project device type and its respective fuel type 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
17 
8.1.1 Average Energy Consumption of Baseline Device (ECi,y) 
The average energy consumption of baseline device type i is calculated as follows:16  
𝐸𝐶𝑖,𝑦= 𝐵𝐶𝑏,𝑖,𝑦× 𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑏,𝑖 
(2) 
Where: 
BCb,i,y 
= Fuel used per baseline device type i during year y (tonnes)17  
NCVb,i 
= Net calorific value of baseline fuel for baseline device type i (TJ/tonne) 
The quantity of fuel that would be used in the baseline scenario must be determined by one of 
the following two methods. 
Option 1: Measurement campaign 
A measurement campaign must be conducted following the procedures in the most recent 
version of the Kitchen Performance Test Protocol. Appendix 4 provides further guidance on 
measurement techniques. The sampling must comply with the most recent version of the CDM 
Standard for Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. 
The campaign must achieve confidence and precision of at least 90/10 for the target 
parameter of average daily fuel consumption per adult equivalent. The result must be scaled 
appropriately using the average household size (Hhi)18 to obtain the value of BCb,i,y. Where the 
project does not achieve the target precision in a monitoring period, the project proponent must 
apply an appropriate conservativeness deduction as per the most recent version of the CDM 
Standard for Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. 
Energy consumption calculated using this option must be determined once prior to validation to 
obtain BCex-ante,b,i.  
Option 2: Default values 
ECi,y is calculated based on the default value for the average annual consumption of woody 
biomass per person for cooking: 
• 
Firewood: 0.5 tonnes/capita/year of air-dried wood  
• 
Charcoal: 0.13 tonnes/capita/year  
 
16 Where charcoal is used as the fuel by baseline and/or project devices, the average energy consumption 
(derived from the average quantity of charcoal fuel used) in the baseline and/or project scenario may be 
determined by using a wood to charcoal conversion factor (CF) instead of the fuel emission factor. Further 
information is provided in the parameter table for CF in Section 9.1. 
17 This parameter corresponds to BCex-ante,b,i for the first two years and where the follow-up baseline survey 
campaign shows that there are no significant changes in baseline fuel consumption. Otherwise, it corresponds to 
BCb,i,y. 
18 This parameter is determined using the procedure described in Section6.2 9.1. 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
18 
Where fuels other than firewood or charcoal are also used in the baseline, their energy use must 
be accounted for in equivalent terms to the values above.  
The result must be scaled appropriately using the average household size (Hhi) to obtain the 
value of BCb,i,y. 
Follow-up baseline surveys must be conducted every two years in control households that do not 
participate in the project. These households must be established prior to validation as 
statistically equivalent to the pre-project conditions of project households regarding fuel 
consumption. Where the biennial follow-up baseline survey campaigns reflect statistically 
significant changes to the baseline, baseline energy consumption must be updated (using a new 
measurement campaign conducted in control households) to obtain BCb,i,y. 
Cross-check of ECi,y to address stove stacking 
Project proponents must address stove stacking (continued use of pre-project devices in project 
households) by comparing the quantity of baseline energy consumption determined by both 
options above (ECi,y) to energy used in the project scenario (ECp,y) using back-calculation. Where 
the results indicate that baseline consumption (ECi,y) is higher than that indicated by back-
calculation from the project scenario (ECest,y) then stove stacking is occurring (as ECp,y is unable 
to completely capture household energy consumption from cooking due to the presence/use of 
pre-project devices). The back-calculation results (ECest,y) must be applied in Equation (1) as a 
conservative cap, except where project devices are electric cooking devices with efficiency of 
70% or higher. In this case, the back-calculation result is considered a reference value and 
project proponents may justify why it is not an appropriate cap by referring to peer-reviewed 
literature, third party assessments, and/or official data or statistics. Where it is not possible to 
justify energy use using these sources of information, the reference value must be applied as a 
conservative cap for such cases as well. 
 
𝐸𝐶𝑒𝑠𝑡,𝑦= 𝐸𝐶𝑝,𝑦× 𝜂𝑛𝑒𝑤,𝑎𝑣𝑔,𝑦
𝜂𝑜𝑙𝑑,𝑎𝑣𝑔
 
(3) 
Where: 
ECest,y 
= Back-calculated energy consumption of the potential mix of devices and fuels 
in the baseline in year y (TJ) 
ECp,y 
= Energy used in project scenario by project devices during year y (TJ) 
ηnew,avg,,y 
= Weighted average efficiency of project devices in year y (fraction) 
ηold,avg 
= Weighted average efficiency of baseline devices that are eplaced by project 
devices (fraction) 
ECp,y must be determined as follows, using the parameters determined as per Section 8.2. 
Alternatively, conversion from MWh to TJ must be undertaken where ECp,y is derived from 
Section 8.2.2.   
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
19 
                                                                                                    
𝐸𝐶𝑝,,𝑦  =   ∑𝐵𝐶𝑝,𝑗,𝑘,𝑦  ×  𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑝,𝑗
𝑗,𝑘
 
(4) 
 
Where: 
BCp,j,k,y 
= Average quantity of fuel used by project device type j from batch k during 
year y (tonnes or m3) 
NCVp,j 
= Net calorific value of project fuel used in project device type j (TJ/tonne or 
TJ/m3) 
 
8.1.1.1 Electric Project Devices With Additional Characteristics Affecting Energy Consumption 
For electric pressure cooker project devices with additional characteristics that affect energy 
consumption (i.e., pressure), thermal efficiency does not reflect the cookstove’s thermal 
performance. In such cases, Equation (5) must be applied to determine specific energy 
consumption. This requires the determination of specific energy consumption for both baseline 
and project scenarios using a Controlled Cooking Test (CCT). CCT is applied since the electric 
pressure cooker is not expected to replace all baseline cooking activities, but only those that 
can be performed by an electric pressure cooker.    
The CCT must be conducted using dishes and cooking practices typical of the project region. 
The CCT must be performed for the same cooking tasks with both the project electric pressure 
cooker and baseline device(s). Cooking tasks that cannot be performed with the project electric 
pressure cooker must be excluded from the baseline CCT. 
𝐸𝐶𝑖,𝑦= 𝐸𝐶𝑝,𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 0.0036 × 𝑆𝐶𝑝,𝑗
𝑆𝐶𝑏,𝑖
 
(5) 
 
Where: 
ECp,j,k,y 
= Annual consumption of electricity by electric project device type j from batch 
k in year y (MWh) 
SCp,j 
= Specific energy consumption of electric pressure cooker project device type j 
in the project scenario (TJ/test/person) 
SCb,i 
= Specific energy consumption of baseline device type i in the baseline 
scenario (TJ/test/person) 
 
Where the project device replaces more than one type of baseline device, the specific 
consumption (SCb,i) must be determined as the weighted average of the specific energy 
consumption of the replaced baseline cooking devices, weighted by the proportion of cooking 
tasks performed by the target population with each type of baseline cooking device. 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
20 
ECi,y must be cross-checked as described above. ECp,j,k,y must be determined as per Section 
8.2.2.  
8.2 
Project Emissions 
Project emissions are calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝑦= 𝑃𝐸𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑦 
(6) 
Where: 
PEy 
= Project emissions during year y (t CO2e) 
PEenergy,y 
= Project emissions from energy consumption of project devices in year y 
(t CO2e) 
PEothers,y 
= Project emissions from other sources in year y (t CO2e) 
To determine project emissions from energy consumption of project devices (PEenergy,y), one of 
the following options (Sections 8.2.1–8.2.3) must be used.  
8.2.1 PEenergy,y from Biomass, Fossil Fuels, or Bioethanol 
 
Project emissions from energy consumption of project devices using biomass, fossil fuels, or 
bioethanol in year y are calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦,𝑦= ∑∑𝐵𝐶𝑝,𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 𝑁𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑝,𝑗× 𝑛𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× (𝐸𝐹𝑝,𝑗,𝐶𝑂2 × 𝑓𝑁𝑅𝐵,𝑦+ 𝐸𝐹𝑝,𝑗,𝑛𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑂2)
𝑘
𝑗
 
(7) 
Where: 
EFp,j,CO2 
= CO2 emission factor for fuel used by project device type j in the project 
scenario (t CO2/TJ) 
EFp,j,nonCO2 
= Non-CO2 emission factor for fuel used by project device type j (t CO2e/TJ) 
The CO2 emission factors for renewable biomass and other renewable energy sources are zero. 
Non-CO2 emissions of these fuels must be accounted for where they are not deemed de 
minimis (see Section 5). 
8.2.1.1 BCp,j,k,y for Project Devices  
There are three approaches to calculating BCp,j,k,y. 
Option 1: Kitchen Performance Test  
A measurement campaign following the Kitchen Performance Test Protocol must be designed, 
carried out, and analyzed in compliance with the most recent version of the CDM Standard for 
Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. The campaign 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
21 
must achieve a confidence and precision of at least 90/10 for the target parameter of average 
daily fuel consumption per adult equivalent. Only the results for project stove fuel consumption 
are used to calculate project emissions. The result must be scaled appropriately using the 
average household size (Hhj,k) to obtain the value of BCp,j,k,y. Where the project does not achieve 
the target precision in a monitoring period, the project proponent must apply an appropriate 
conservativeness deduction as per Section 4 of the most recent version of CDM Standard for 
Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. 
Option 2: Direct measurement 
Use direct measurement with equipment calibrated in accordance with national/international 
requirements. A sample of project devices may be measured such that a confidence and 
precision of 90/10 is achieved for the target parameter of total annual fuel use. The sampling 
must comply with the most recent version of the CDM Standard for Sampling and Surveys for 
CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. Where the project does not achieve the 
target precision in a monitoring period, the project proponent must apply an appropriate 
conservativeness deduction as per Section 4 of the most recent version of CDM Standard for 
Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. 
Option 3: Fuel purchase monitoring (only for project devices using fossil fuels or bioethanol) 
Where applying this option, the project proponent must:  
1) keep continuous records of all fuel purchases (e.g., fuel purchase invoices from the 
supplier).  
2) ensure fuel is used only for thermal energy generation by the project device (e.g., by 
using a fuel cylinder design that may only be attached to the project device).  
8.2.2 PEenergy,y from Electricity 
 
Where the project activity involves the introduction of electric devices, project emissions are 
calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦,𝑦= ∑∑𝐸𝐶𝑝,𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 𝑁𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 𝑛𝑗,𝑘,𝑦× 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑙,𝑦× (1 + 𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑗,𝑦)
𝑘
𝑗
 
(8) 
Where: 
EFel,y 
= Emission factor of the electricity system in year y; equal to zero for 100% 
renewable sources (t CO2e/MWh) 
TDLj,y 
= Average technical transmission and distribution losses for providing 
electricity to project device type j in year y 
Electricity consumption ECp,j,k,y must be estimated by one of the following two options (in MWh). 
For both options, where the project does not achieve the target precision in a monitoring 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
22 
period, the project proponent must apply an appropriate conservativeness deduction as per 
Section 4 of the most recent version of the CDM Standard for Sampling and Surveys for CDM 
Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. 
Option 1: Kitchen Performance Test  
A measurement campaign following the Kitchen Performance Test Protocol must be designed, 
carried out, and analyzed in compliance with the most recent version of the CDM Standard for 
Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of Activities. The campaign 
must achieve a confidence and precision of at least 90/10 for the target parameter of average 
daily fuel consumption per adult equivalent. Only the results for project stove fuel consumption 
are used to calculate project emissions. The result must be scaled appropriately using the 
average household size (Hhj,k) to obtain the value of BCp,j,k,y.  
Option 2: Direct measurement 
Use direct measurement by metering. All project devices may be measured, or a sample of 
project devices may be measured, following the sampling approach described in the most 
recent version of the CDM Standard for Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and 
Programmes of Activities with a confidence level and precision of at least 90/10. Where 
electricity consumption of all project devices is measured continuously, adoption rate (nj,k,y) may 
be considered equal to one.  
8.2.3 PEothers,y from Transportation, Fuel Production, Fugitive Emissions, and Backup 
Generators 
𝑃𝐸𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑦= 𝑃𝐸𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝑓𝑢𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒,𝑦 + 𝑃𝐸𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑢𝑝,𝑦 
(9) 
Where: 
PEtransp,y 
= Project emissions due to fuel transportation in year y (t CO2e) 
PEprod,y 
= Project emissions due to fuel production in year y (t CO2e) 
PEfugitive,y 
= Fugitive emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
PEbackup,y 
= Project emissions from backup generators in year y (t CO2e) 
Project emissions from fuel transportation (PEtransp,y) 
PEtransp,y must be estimated where the average transportation distance is greater than 200 km 
or where it is not demonstrated through valid means (like mapping tools) to be less than 200 
km. In the latter case, a conservative estimate of the transportation distance must be used. 
The most recent version of CDM TOOL12 Project and Leakage Emissions from Transportation 
of Freight must be applied. 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
23 
Where the average transportation distance is less than 200 km, it may be assumed that 
baseline and project emissions from fuel transportation are similar and project emissions may 
be excluded.  
Project emissions from fuel production (PEprod,y) 
PEprod,y must be determined for renewable biomass (e.g., firewood) or biomass-derived fuels 
(e.g., bioethanol) by applying CDM TOOL16 Project and Leakage Emissions from Biomass. 
PEprod,y must include applicable emissions resulting from soil management, cultivation, 
thermal/mechanical processing, and biomass burning associated with fuel production. 
Projects using LPG must apply CDM TOOL15 Upstream Leakage Emissions Associated With 
Fossil Fuel Use to determine upstream emissions.  
Fugitive emissions (PEfugitive,y)  
PEfugitive,y from renewable charcoal must be estimated by applying the most recent version of 
AMS-III.K. Avoidance of Methane Release from Charcoal Production.19 
Project emissions from backup generators (PEbackup,y) 
For project devices using electricity from a mini-grid with backup generators, emissions from 
fuel consumption must be determined as follows:  
𝑃𝐸𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑢𝑝,𝑦= ∑𝐹𝐶ℎ,𝑦× 𝑁𝐶𝑉ℎ × 𝐸𝐹𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,ℎ
ℎ
 
(10) 
Where: 
FCh,y 
= Fuel consumption of backup generator h in year y (tonnes) 
NCVh 
= Net calorific value of fuel used by backup generator h (TJ/tonne) 
EFfuel,h 
= Emission factor for fuel used by backup generator h (t CO2e/TJ) 
 
 
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
Leakage emissions (LEy) must be accounted as follows: 
1) Leakage emissions associated with reduced or avoided use of non-renewable biomass: 
a) Use of non-renewable biomass by other users and other types of GHG reversals20 
 
19 Using Equation 4 of AMS-III.K, v5.0 or the equivalent equation in the most recent version. 
20 Other non-permanence risks, such as fires 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
24 
b) Reuse outside the project boundaries of baseline devices that were replaced by 
project devices  
An adjustment factor of 0.95 is applied to the GHG emission reductions in Equation 
(11) (i.e., 0.95 × (BEy − PEy)). 
2) Leakage emissions associated with fossil fuel use: 
a) Increased emissions from fossil fuel use by non-project participants 
An adjustment factor of 0.95 is applied to the GHG emission reductions in Equation 
(11) (i.e., 0.95 × (BEy − PEy)). 
3) Leakage emissions associated with use of renewable biomass (LERB,y): 
a) Shift of pre-project activities due to the establishment of dedicated plantations 
for renewable biomass supply 
b) Diversion of biomass residues from other uses to the project activity 
These leakage emissions must be calculated using CDM TOOL16. 
8.4 
Net GHG Emission Reductions 
Net GHG emission reductions are calculated as follows: 
𝐸𝑅𝑦  =  (𝐵𝐸𝑦  − 𝑃𝐸𝑦)  ×  0.95 −𝐿𝐸𝑅𝐵,𝑦 
(11) 
Where: 
ERy 
= Emission reductions during year y (t CO2e) 
LERB,y 
= Leakage emissions associated with use of renewable biomass during 
year y (t CO2e) 
 
 
VM0050, v1.0  
 
25