2 
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
This methodology for Improved Forest Management – Logged to Protected Forest quantifies GHG emission 
reductions/removals from projects on land with forests remaining forests and where carbon sequestration occurs 
when logging in the baseline scenario is avoided in the project scenario.   
2.1 
Baseline and Project Scenario Steps: 
1. Determine project eligibility and applicability of this methodology. 
2. Establish the project area (= private property boundary). 
3. Establish a project time horizon. 
4. Determine multiple credible and realistic baseline scenarios. 
5. Select the baseline scenario 
6. Test for additionality using designated tools and requirements. 
7. Select the applicable carbon pools and emission sources for the project area. 
8. Create detailed baseline scenario and project scenario assumptions: 
a. Spatially stratify the current land cover and land use conditions by area, if necessary: 
b. Determine the timber harvesting land base area(s) 
c. Project the baseline and project scenario forest management schedule, including forest 
regeneration practices, for a minimum of one rotation. Include spatially located harvestable 
volume and area by analysis unit and year, identify stand level harvesting methods and 
assumptions, and identify additional relevant scenario modeling information.   
d. Project the net annual ecosystem carbon stock changes over time under the baseline and project 
scenarios, including changes due to harvest removals, regeneration, stand growth, mortality, and 
any additional factors that materially affect carbon balance.   
9. Calculate annualized and project total ex-ante carbon pool flows and GHG Emissions for the baseline 
and project scenarios.   
VM0012, Version 1.2 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
 
Copyright ©2013 3GreenTree Ecosystem Services Ltd. 
4 
10. Calculate the net change in GHG emissions between the ex-ante ecosystem carbon projections for the 
baseline and project scenarios, on an annualized basis.   
11. Assess leakage risks to determine a leakage factor to be applied to the net annual GHG emission 
changes.   
12. Calculate and estimate the expected net VCU’s, including calculating VCS permanence buffer 
requirements. 
13. Calculate and apply an uncertainty factor to net GHG emission reductions.   
2.2 
Monitoring Steps: 
1. 
Determine the data and assumptions to be monitored to assess ex-post carbon stock changes in the 
project area. 
2. 
Determine remote sensing activities for monitoring ex-post land use changes on the project area.   
3. Develop and implement a systematic field plot network for estimating and monitoring actual stand level 
biomass within the project boundary.   
4. Develop and implement a leakage monitoring plan. 
5. 
Develop a record-keeping procedure to record and archive monitoring activities, results, and related 
management actions.   
6. Design a quality assurance/quality control program related to monitoring.