3 DEFINITIONS 
Aggregate 
A collective term for the mineral materials such as sand, gravel and crushed stone that are 
used with a binding medium to form asphalt. Aggregate can be from either natural or 
recycled sources, called virgin aggregate or recycled aggregate. 
Asphalt 
A cementitious material, ranging from a dark brown to black color, in which the 
predominating constituents are bitumens that occur in nature or are obtained by petroleum 
processing. 
Asphalt Emulsions 
A dispersion of small droplets of one liquid into another liquid. Usually, asphalt emulsions 
contain small droplets of asphalt binder in water and emulsifying agent. Standard asphalt 
emulsions contain 40% to 75% asphalt binder, 0.1% to 2.5% emulsifier, and 25% to 60% 
water. 
Asphalt Pavement 
Asphalt concrete layer(s) on supporting courses such as concrete base, asphalt treated 
base, cement treated base, granular base, and/or granular sub-base placed over the 
subgrade. 
Bitumen 
A black or dark colored organic material with adhesive properties derived from distillation of 
petroleum or natural asphalt. Bitumen is also called liquid asphalt, asphalt binder, and/or 
liquid asphalt cement. 
 VM0039, v1.1 
 
6 
 
Cold Central Plant Recycling (CCPR) 
A method for producing FSB and asphalt emulsions which requires milled reclaimed asphalt 
pavement (RAP) to be transported from an existing jobsite to a central mixing plant. The 
unheated RAP is then blended with foamed asphalt and a small amount of Portland cement 
in a cold mixing process. 
Cold In-Place Recycling (CIR) 
The principal method for producing FSB and asphalt emulsions which uses one or more 
mobile recycling machines for milling, asphalt production, and placement in a continuous 
operation at the pavement site. Generally, CIR uses 100% RAP generated from the existing 
pavement, which is blended with small amount of Portland cement with a treatment depth 
ranging from approximately 2 to 6 inches. 
Foamed Asphalt 
A mixture of air, water, and bitumen. When injected with a small quantity of cold water, the 
hot bitumen expands explosively to about fifteen times its original volume and forms a fine 
mist or foam. In this foamed state, the bitumen has a very large surface area and an 
extremely low viscosity. This expanded bitumen mist is then incorporated into the mixing 
drum where the bitumen droplets are attracted to and coat the finer particles of pavement 
material, thus forming a mastic that effectively binds the mixture together. 
Foamed Stabilized Base (FSB) 
A mixture of foamed asphalt binder and RAP, or a combination of RAP and recycled 
concrete. Unlike hot mix asphalt (HMA), the foamed binder does not coat the aggregate 
particles. Rather, it coats the fines (passing #200 sieve) in the aggregate, which helps serve 
as a bonding agent to keep the aggregate particles together. FSB is generally used as a 
base course layer in the pavement construction in lieu of conventional HMA in order to 
reduce the carbon footprint of construction operations. 
Full-Depth Reclamation (FDR) 
A technique in which the full thickness of the asphalt pavement and a pre-determined 
portion of the underlying material (base, sub base, and/or subgrade) is uniformly pulverized 
and blended to provide an upgraded, homogenous base material. FDR is performed on the 
roadway without the addition of heat, similar to CIR. Thus, the emissions from FDR can be 
quantified using the same method as CIR. 
Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) 
A mixture of course aggregate, fine aggregate, and asphalt cement that is produced at a 
central facility at temperatures between 300 and 325°F. HMA can incorporate a small 
amount of RAP (usually 10% to 30%) into the mix. 
Portland Cement 
The most common type of generally used cement around the world. It is used as a basic 
ingredient of concrete, mortar, stucco, and most non-specialty grout. It usually originates 
from limestone. Portland cement is a fine powder that consists of more than 90% ground 
Portland cement clinker, a limited amount of calcium sulfate (which controls the set time), 
and up to 5% minor constituents as allowed by various standards. 
Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) 
Material generated from milling existing asphalt pavement layers during the rehabilitation of 
paved surfaces. RAP consists of aggregates that are coated by asphalt. 
 VM0039, v1.1 
 
7 
 
Structural Layer Coefficient 
The relative structural capacity of a material per inch of thickness. 
Virgin Aggregate 
Aggregate that has been quarried and not used in any prior asphalt applications. 
Warm Mix Asphalt (WMA) 
A subcategory of HMA that is produced within a target temperature discharge range using 
the applicable state Department of Transportation (DOT) approved WMA additives or 
processes. The WMA technologies may be used as coating and compaction aids without 
lowering the production temperature. 
 
 
 VM0039, v1.1 
 
8