3 DEFINITIONS 
Appliance 
A household appliance powered by electricity or another fuel source, including but not limited 
to, a refrigerator, microwave, dishwasher, clothes washer or dryer, space heater, or water 
heater. It also includes heat pumps for space heating, space cooling, and water heating where 
their GHG reductions can be determined on a discrete basis (e.g., using building weather 
adjusted energy modelling systems or HERS audit ratings). Central heating and cooling systems 
are excluded. An appliance operates as a discrete, standalone unit.  
Building envelope 
The exterior thermal boundary of the physical structure of an individual building. Thermal 
boundary typically includes the ceiling/roof, wall, floor, attic floor, window, or door that 
separates the habitable, occupiable, and conditioned spaces from the outdoor weather. 
Cooling degree days (CDD) 
Measure the cumulative degree difference between the warmer outside temperature and the 
base temperature of the conditioned space on a daily basis during the cooling season. CDD are 
determined by summing the daily degree days, which are calculated as the average daily 
temperature minus the base temperature. The average daily temperature is calculated by 
summing the daily high temperature and the daily low temperature and dividing by two. The 
average daily temperature can also be calculated by averaging the daily temperature over 
shorter time intervals, rather than just the high and low temperature. CDD reported by weather 
stations are often reported in sixty or thirty minute time intervals. In the US, the cooling base 
temperature is 78° F. 
Dwelling 
A residential unit, including single-family homes, mobile homes, multi-family buildings, 
apartments within multi-family buildings, or other housing types defined in the CBECS Lodging 
category. It also includes non-traditional buildings listed under the CBECS Public Order 
category, such as fire stations, jails, reformatories, or penitentiaries. Beyond traditional multi-
family housing, multi-family buildings may include commercial residential facilities, such as 
hotels, dormitories, and nursing homes.1 
Energy load  
The sum of the heat load, cooling load and the electricity demand per Dwelling. Heat load 
means the total fuel consumed, including electricity (in Btus, GJ or kWh) to provide comfort in a 
conditioned space in a given year. Cooling load means the total electricity, or other fuel type in 
the case of central cooling systems, consumed (in Btus, GJ or kWh) necessary to remove heat 
from the conditioned space to provide comfort in a given year.  
 
1 In the United States, multi-family buildings that are over three stories above grade are considered commercial under the 
ASHRAE building standard 90.1-2004. These are also covered by the methodology. 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
6 
Fuel switching  
A change in the energy or fuel source (e.g., switching from natural gas to electricity) 
Heat Pump Appliance 
 
An air sourced heat pump (both self-contained and central systems), split heat pump 
heating/cooling system, heat pump water heater, or geothermal2 heat pump direct exchange 
heating/cooling system. 
Heating degree days (HDD)  
Measure the cumulative degree difference between the colder outside temperature and the 
base temperature of the conditioned space on a daily basis during the heating season. HDD are 
determined by summing the daily degree days, which are calculated as the base temperature 
minus the average daily temperature.3 The average daily temperature is calculated by summing 
the daily high temperature and the daily low temperature and dividing by two. The average daily 
temperature can also be calculated by averaging the daily temperature over shorter time 
intervals, rather than just the high and low temperature. HDD reported by weather stations are 
often reported in sixty or thirty minute time intervals. In the US, the base temperature is 65°F. 
In the UK, the base temperature is 15°C.  
R-value  
A measurement of thermal resistance as expressed by a recognized authority, such as the U.S. 
Department of Energy, or the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-conditioning 
Engineers (ASHRAE). The R-value of insulation in the floor, walls, ceiling, skirting or any other 
element will depend on the thickness and specific material of the installed insulation.  
Same building stock  
Dwellings 1) in the same state, province, or region, 2) in the same category (single family or 
multi-family), and 3) inhabited by the same income group (low-income, middle-income or high-
income) as defined by a recognized authority.4  
U-value  
The thermal conductance of a material or, in other words, the total heat transmission in GJ per 
square meter per hour with a 1°C temperature difference between the inside and the outside. 
The U-value of the window is the inverse of the R-value or 1/R. The U-value for the make and 
 
2 As distinct from large scale geothermal energy/electricity power production systems (e.g 
https://www.nrel.gov/research/re-geo-elec-
production.html#:~:text=The%20steam%20comes%20from%20reservoirs,more%20below%20the%20earth's%20surfac
e.&text=The%20steam%20rotates%20a%20turbine,flash%20steam%2C%20and%20binary%20cycle.) 
3 For example, a winter day (24 hours) has a low daily temperature of 20°F and a high daily temperature of 35°F. The total 
HDD for that day are calculated as: 65°F (base temperature) – ((35°F+20°F)/2). The HDD for that day are 37.5. If, the next 
day is slightly warmer and the daily low is 30°F and the daily high is 38°F, then the HDD for that day are 31. The cumulative 
HDD for the two days are 68.5. HDD for the heating season are cumulative. 
4 In the US, The Department of Health and Human Services issues guidelines that define the term “low-income” as a multiple 
of the income level defined as poverty level on an annual basis. For example, the 2009 poverty level was $10,400 for a single 
person, and $21,200 for a family of four. Households are considered low income if their household income is no more than 
200% of poverty level. 
 
VM0008, v1.2 
7 
model of a window can often be found on a window manufacturer’s specification sheet 
included with the window.  
Weatherization  
Energy efficiency measures in dwellings. Weatherizing refers to the act of installing energy 
efficiency measures in dwellings.