3 
DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this methodology, the following definitions apply: 
Commercial fleet - 10 or more vehicles owned by a single company and used for business 
purposes. 
Direct measurement – Direct measurement of fuel consumption in the project activity 
corresponds to a measurement that registers the data that will be utilized in the emission 
reduction calculation with no treatment (i.e., no statistical estimation or conversion can be used to 
find the fuel consumption in liters). 
Emergency gasoline - gasoline consumed in cases of ethanol temporary unavailability in specific 
gas stations. 
Ethanol - fuel produced from renewable biological resources such as plant biomass. 
Flex-fuel vehicle - a flexible-fuel vehicle (FFV) is an automobile that can alternate between at 
least two sources of fuel, such as gasoline or ethanol blends in any proportion. 
Fuel consumption pattern - proportion of gasoline to ethanol used in the flex-fuel vehicles of the 
project proponent commercial fleets in the baseline scenario. 
Greenfield – any new project activity instance, corresponding to an existent flex-fuel vehicles 
fleet, with insufficient history under the monitoring conditions specified by the project activity. 
Indirect measurement – Indirect measurement of fuel consumption in the project activity 
corresponds to a measurement of a data registry that needs to be converted to the unit that will 
be used for the emission reduction calculation, or the measurement of a sample group that will be 
used to estimate the consumption of the whole fleet.  
Lifecycle emissions - The aggregate quantity of greenhouse gas emissions (including direct and 
significant indirect emissions such as land use changes), related to the full fuel lifecycle, including 
all stages of fuel and feedstock production and distribution, from feedstock generation or 
extraction through the distribution, delivery and use of the finished fuel by the final consumer.1 
Opportunity cost - The cost of an alternative that must be forgotten when the fleet owner 
decides to adhere the project activity (e.g., the benefits from the flexible alternative (the choice for 
the cheapest fuel type) that the fleet owner is giving up when opting for the exclusive 
consumption of ethanol). 
Regional Grouping - is a multivariable method that aims at classifying a sample of subjects (or 
objects) on the basis of a set of measured variables. 
Renewable materials - any natural resources of economic value that can be replaced or 
replenished fast enough so that the supply continues to be available in time. In the case of fuels, 
renewable materials are those whose source can be cultivated and/or replaced by human activity 
(e.g. wheat, corn, sugar beets, sugar cane and molasses). 
                                                          
1  The definition of lifecycle emissions was adapted from the United States Energy Independence and Security 
Act of 2007 (EISA), retrieved from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), available at: 
http://www.epa.gov/oms/renewablefuels/420f10006.htm#footnotes  
VM0019, Version 1 
Sectoral Scope 7 
 
 
 
Page 8
Start-up Gasoline - gasoline reserved for the ignition of ethanol engines at low temperatures in 
flex-fuel technologies, located in a separate reservoir of around 1 liter.  
Vehicle owner - company responsible for the operational control of the vehicle.