10 REFERENCES 
Heffron, R. J. 2021. “The Elements of the Just Transition Within International Institutions.” In 
Achieving a Just Transition to a Low-Carbon Economy. Palgrave Macmillan. 
ILO. 2015. Guidelines for a Just Transition Towards Environmentally Sustainable Economies 
and Societies for All. International Labour Organization. 
https://www.ilo.org/publications/guidelines-just-transition-towards-environmentally-
sustainable-economies  
KCI. 2022. Implementation of Just Transition and Economic Diversification Strategies: A 
Compilation of Best Practices From Different Countries. UNFCCC. 
https://unfccc.int/documents/624596 
Luna, F. 2019. “Identifying and Evaluating Layers of Vulnerability – A Way Forward.” Developing 
World Bioethics 19 (2): 86–95. https://doi.org/10.1111/dewb.12206 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
30 
APPENDIX 1: GUIDANCE ON VCS 
REQUIREMENTS  
This section provides guidance on requirements of the VCS Standard in the context of projects 
developed using this methodology.  
1) Start date: As per the VCS Standard, the start date for non-AFOLU projects corresponds to the 
date on which the project starts to generate GHG emission reductions and/or carbon dioxide 
removals. For this methodology, the start date corresponds to the date on which the CFPP 
completely ceases electricity production. This may also be considered the accelerated 
retirement date.  
2) Crediting period: The crediting period is the shorter of the period in accordance with the most 
recent version of the VCS Standard and the period between the CFPP’s accelerated retirement 
date (i.e., date by which the CFPP has been decommissioned) and the baseline retirement date. 
Example 1: The first crediting period is seven years, and the difference between the accelerated 
retirement date and the baseline retirement date is three years. In such a scenario, the project 
is eligible to be issued VCUs for three years and not seven years.  
Example 2: The total crediting period is 21 years (seven years twice renewable), and the 
difference between the accelerated retirement date and the baseline retirement date is 25 
years. In such a scenario, the project is eligible to be issued VCUs for 21 years provided it 
complies with all rules and requirements applicable at each renewal of the project crediting 
period.  
3) Crediting period renewal and updated baseline retirement date: Project proponents must follow 
the procedures for renewal of the project crediting period in accordance with the most recent 
version of the VCS Program rules and requirements.  
When demonstrating the validity of the original baseline scenario or updating the baseline 
scenario, the baseline retirement date must be reassessed in accordance with the criteria and 
procedures of the most recent version of VMD0060. Only the scenarios related to regulations 
and commitments must be reassessed during the crediting period renewal process, as listed 
below. The dates of the other scenarios remain the same and do not require reassessment. 
The baseline retirement date for the CFPP is the earliest date of the following scenarios: 
a) Scenarios that must be reassessed and updated at crediting period renewal: 
i) 
Regulatory CFPP phaseout date 
ii) Committed coal transition mechanism (CTM) 
b) Scenarios that are determined at validation and not reassessed at crediting period 
renewal: 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
31 
i) 
End of technical life 
ii) End of long-term PPA 
iii) Financially attractive retirement7 
The updated baseline retirement date for the CFPP applicable for the next crediting period will 
depend on the results of the reassessment of the applicable scenarios: 
• 
Where the baseline retirement date reassessment does not result in a different date, 
the baseline retirement date remains the same as in the previous crediting period. 
• 
Where the baseline retirement date reassessment results in a later date (e.g., due to a 
delay in regulatory phaseout or CTM commitments), the baseline retirement date 
remains the same as in the previous crediting period. 
• 
Where the baseline retirement date reassessment results in an earlier date (e.g., 
because the regulatory commitment has advanced), the baseline retirement date for 
the next crediting period is the earlier date. In this case, the duration of the crediting 
period must be updated and will terminate at the new baseline retirement date or the 
maximum length of the crediting period outlined in the most recent version of the VCS 
Standard, whichever is earlier. 
4) Sustainable development contributions: The impacts of just transition implementation in the 
context of accelerated CFPP retirement as per VMD0061 (e.g., voluntary retirement benefits 
given to CFPP employees nearing the age of retirement, or training provided to existing 
employees) must not be reported as sustainable development contributions. These activities 
represent minimizing the impacts of accelerated CFPP retirement on livelihoods under the 
principle of no net harm. Additional benefits generated for the environment and community 
through paired renewable electricity or using revenue from sales of VCUs may be claimed as 
sustainable development contributions (e.g., additional jobs created due to renewable 
electricity deployment or setting up a new local healthcare facility for neighboring communities 
using revenue from sales of VCUs). 
5) Stakeholder engagement: The project proponent must demonstrate compliance with the 
requirements of stakeholder engagement in the most recent version of the VCS Standard, for 
CFPP sites and paired renewable electricity sites. Where the location of paired renewable 
electricity is yet to be finalized, stakeholder consultation must include at least one paired 
renewable electricity location. The requirements for just transition as established in VMD0061 
are additional to the stakeholder engagement requirements of the VCS Standard and are 
limited to the context of the CFPP.  
6) Safeguards: The project proponent must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of 
safeguards in the most recent version of the VCS Standard, for the CFPP sites and paired 
 
7 The financially attractive retirement date only needs to be assessed during monitoring or crediting period renewal if a 
project design change is made that impacts this date. 
 
VM0052, v1.0 
32 
renewable electricity sites. The requirements for just transition as established in VMD0061 are 
additional to the safeguards requirements of the VCS Standard and are limited to the context of 
the CFPP.  
7) No double claiming with other forms of environmental credit: The renewable electricity paired 
with the accelerated CFPP retirement is ineligible to claim other forms of environmental credits 
or certificates such as Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) for the duration of the crediting 
period. Off-takers from the paired renewable electricity plants should account for the power as 
having the emission factor of the retired coal plant in their inventory reporting during the 
crediting period.  
 
 
 
VM0052, v1.0