6  
PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINING THE BASELINE SCENARIO AND 
DEMONSTRATING ADDITIONALITY 
Regardless of the specific project type being proposed, the project proponent must follow the step-wise 
approach specified in the CDM Combined Tool to Identify the Baseline Scenario and Demonstrate 
Additionality to identify the baseline scenario and demonstrate additionality. The tool shall be applied with 
baseline alternatives and project scenarios categorized by project units. The cost savings associated with energy 
efficiency shall be included in the investment analysis. 
When selecting the baseline period for waste diversion and energy efficiency activities, the 
appropriateness of baseline period shall be analyzed for the two activities separately. While one baseline 
period for both may be deemed appropriate, it is also possible that different baseline periods and 
approaches are required for the different activities. As one example, the best unit of productivity for the 
waste diversion baseline period may be different from that for the energy efficiency baseline period 
depending on the selected unit of productivity and the quality of data available for each.  
The baseline scenario shall be determined by analyzing, at minimum, the following potential alternatives: 
a. 
Each business owner proactively exceeds the current regulations and decreases their per 
unit energy consumption. Additionally, each business owner could also purchase new 
capital equipment prior to the natural turnover rate of their existing stock, for the purposes 
of energy efficiency savings, without installing the added monitoring equipment as 
required to quantify GHG emission reductions. This step is essentially the implementation 
of the energy efficiency project activity without carbon financing.   
b. 
Each business owner proactively puts into place a system to treat waste in a manner 
other than anaerobic decomposition in a landfill. This step is essentially the 
implementation of the waste diversion project activity without carbon financing.  
c. 
The government or industrial sector enforces minimum building codes, not only for new 
facilities but for the current stock of buildings. These codes could mandate certain levels 
of efficiency or waste handling that could achieve the anticipated results of this protocol 
without the use of VCUs. 
d. 
The continuation of the current situation (ie, no project activity or other alternatives 
undertaken). Comparable outputs of the project – constant energy intensity per 
production unit and anaerobic decomposition of waste in landfill – will continue. Currently, 
technologies/ practices that provide outputs/services of comparable qualities, properties 
and application areas as the proposed project activity, are not incentivized and are not 
introduced to the market for dispersed client facilities. These facilities do not have the 
economies of scale necessary to develop and operate the necessary monitoring systems 
to achieve affordable gains similar to the goals of this protocol. 
 
VM0018, Version 1 
Sectoral Scopes 3, 13 
33