2 
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Project Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
 
2.1 
Project Activities 
The project activities eligible to apply this methodology include any that manipulate number and 
type of domestic livestock grazing animals (e,g cattle, sheep, horses, goats, camels, llamas, 
alpacas, guanacos, or buffalo) and/or grouping, timing and season of grazing (eg, continuous 
unrestricted, planned rotational, bunched herd rotational or other means of restricting livestock 
access to forage in order to allow vegetation response) in ways that sequester  soil carbon and/or 
reduce methane emissions. Altering fire frequency and/or intensity, (eg, shifting from late season 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 5 
to early season burning or changing prescribed burn schedules from one every other year to one 
every five years) in ways that increase carbon inputs to soil, is also an included activity. Increased 
fire may be used to shift plant species composition such that net carbon sequestration in soil 
increases (eg, conducting a single burn to shift vegetation from shrubs to grasses), but the net 
increase in SOC must compensate for any losses in woody biomass and increases in methane 
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions. Grassland restoration activities to improve livestock 
forage density (eg seeding of legumes or perennial grasses) that do not involve mechanical 
tillage of soil are allowed. 
It is expected that such project activities will occur on grasslands that have historically 
experienced SOC loss.  As these areas would continue to maintain low levels or further loss of 
SOC in the absence of the project, it is therefore expected that other carbon pools, such as 
aboveground carbon pools or biomass, will have relatively little change. The loss of SOC in the 
baseline prior to the project start date may be caused by fires that occur frequently enough to 
reduce SOC, or overgrazing that is expected to continue in the absence of the project. 
Some grasslands (eg, savannas and open woodlands) may feature significant aboveground 
woody plant biomass that exceeds five percent of the soil carbon pool. Some woody biomass, 
largely in the form of shrubs or small trees, can reduce grass density and soil carbon. 
Management fires to reduce this woody cover might therefore reduce carbon in the aboveground 
woody biomass pool but compensate by increasing grass production and total carbon 
sequestration in soil.[1] Such scenarios are allowable under this methodology. 
2.2 
Quantification Approach 
Projects may rely on measured or modeled approaches (see Table 1 below):  
Measured approach: Emission reductions are quantified following a period in which enhanced soil 
sequestration and/or reduced methane emissions can be demonstrated. Such projects have a 
reduced uncertainty compared to those following a modeled approach, but projects that include 
soil sequestration activities may claim and verify emission reductions only after increases in soil 
carbon can be detected (likely every five or more years, depending on the productivity of the site).  
Modeled approach: Emission reductions are quantified using a validated model after 
demonstrating management activities, which are known to sequester carbon and/or reduce 
methane emissions, have been implemented. Reduced emissions from sequestration and 
reduced methane emissions associated with these activities are then estimated by models with 
acceptable precision which have been validated for the project and re-calibrated at regular 
intervals thereafter (5-10 years, depending on the productivity of the site).  
Modeled approaches have higher uncertainty due to the uncertainty in the parameters used to 
calculate emissions and removals and the uncertainty in whether model calculations actually 
describe changes in sequestration and reduced emissions. Consequently, verified modeled 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 6 
emission reductions will likely be reduced due to uncertainty deductions. However, because 
activities may be demonstrated annually, emission reductions may be verified annually, if desired.  
This modeling approach requires the use of soil carbon models that have been published in peer-
reviewed journal articles. Models must have been validated with independent data. Data used to 
validate the model must have been published in a peer-reviewed journal article and independent 
from data used to build the model. Soil carbon models describe how the density of soil organic 
carbon (SOC) changes as a result of biogeochemical processes and soil characteristics (eg, soil 
texture and type, pH, temperature, and moisture) and modifications in the capture of CO2 and 
production of carbon-containing root and shoot biomass by plants. This aboveground and 
belowground biomass may undergo one of several fates:  
1)  Conversion back to CO2 by combustion during fire,  
2)  Consumption and respiration by grazing animals,  
3)  Decomposition and respiration by microbes in soil and/or in the guts of invertebrate 
decomposers, or  
4)  Remaining as SOC from decomposed plant material or grazing animal dung.  
As would be expected for such a complicated process, such models usually require the input of 
many parameters that need to be measured or obtained from the literature. When choosing which 
approach to take, the project proponent must consider carefully its ability to obtain necessary 
parameter measurements and to validate the chosen model for their project area. 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 7 
Table 1: Summary of Measured vs Modeled Approaches 
 
Table 1 summarizes the procedures for applying either the measured approach or the modeled 
approach. While there are additional steps to using the modeled approach compared to the 
measured approach, the project proponent may monitor activities and calculate emission 
reductions more frequently (eg every 1-2 years as opposed to every 5-10 years) with the 
measured approach. 
2.3 
Baseline and Project Emissions and Reductions 
The project proponent must demonstrate baseline conditions for the 10 years prior to the project 
start date, including:  
1) land uses,  
2) fire histories such as the number of times, sections or strata of the project area burned 
and when these fires occurred, and  
Frequency
Frequency
Demonstration of SOC impoverishing activities
Demonstration of SOC impoverishing activities
Measurements
Build Model
* Choose model
* Measure/find parameters
* Accuracy assessment of prediction
* Predict initial SOC
Every 5‐10 
years
Every 1‐2
years
Verified Carbon Unit Calculation at Verification
Every 5‐10 
years
Every 1‐2
years
Model Re‐calibration
Every 5‐10 
years
* Measure SOC
* Assessment of prediction
* Model adjustment
* Methane
* Uncertainty analysis
* Claim VCU's
* Measure/find parameters
Modeled Approach
* Calculate SOC from model
* Measure grazing animal numbers
* Calculate methane emissions
* Uncertainty analysis
* Initial SOC
* Past grazing animal numbers
* Forage quality
* Past fire frequency
* Conduct activities
* Measure/find parameters
* Monte Carlo analysis for uncertainty
* Measure project  fire frequency
Measured Approach
* Uncertainty analysis
* Methane
*Claim VCU’s
* Uncertainty analysis
Measurements
Project Scenario
Baseline
* Conduct activities
* Measure SOC
* Animal numbers during crediting period
* Forage quality during crediting period
* Uncertainty analysis and deduction 
* Initial SOC
* Past grazing animal numbers
* Forage quality
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 8 
3) grazing livestock animal numbers from detailed records such as surveys of livestock 
owners, past aerial surveys or ground censuses of livestock animals. These data are 
necessary to assess baseline methane emissions from enteric fermentation.  
Baseline conditions may be determined from analysis of past satellite images, such as MODIS 
Burned Area Product maps to assess fire histories or with other satellite imagery such as 
Landsat, with demonstrated suitability from peer-reviewed scientific papers and/or from data from 
the project area to detect vegetation types and trends. Interpretation of satellite images during the 
project crediting period coupled with ground assessments of the occurrence of fire at multiple 
sampling stations is needed for verification of fire-abatement activities. 
For the project scenario, both the modeled and measured approaches require sampling of soils 
and measurement of bulk density and SOC. If using the modeled approach, the soil sample depth 
is determined by the model (eg, 20 – 100 cm). This sampling will occur at the start of the project 
and be used to establish the baseline scenario. Likewise, for both approaches, ground censuses, 
household surveys, and/or aerial surveys of grazing animal numbers broken out by species, sex, 
and age are needed to determine baseline methane emissions and project reductions (or 
increases).  
The measured approach simply calculates the difference in SOC at each verification event since 
the project start date or previous verification event. Note that sufficient time must pass between 
verification events to detect changes in SOC (eg, five or more years, depending on productivity in 
the project area). The initial and subsequent measurements of SOC occur at each of many 
permanent sampling stations located in different subareas (strata) within the project area that 
differ strongly in current or past vegetation, soil types or management activities. The sum of the 
differences in SOC, called ∆SOC, at each sampling station across the project area reflects net 
GHG emission reductions and removals from the soil carbon pool.  
If a modeled approach is used, measurements of parameters, or information used to obtain 
parameter values, must be available to be input into a peer-reviewed, published, and accuracy-
tested (at least once) model of soil carbon dynamics (eg, SNAP[2] CENTURY[3, 4]], EPIC[4], or the 
Hurley Pasture[5] models). The model must include parameters impacted by project activities (eg, 
grazing intensity and fire frequency) as well as critical factors affecting carbon inputs and outputs 
to soil (eg, soil texture, climate, and plant characteristics that affect decomposition). The specific 
factors needed will depend on the model used, as some models, such as CENTURY, require 
more than 20 factors, while others, like SNAP, require only five factors. To ensure that a model 
predicts changes in emissions or removals accurately and precisely enough to achieve a 
sufficiently low uncertainty in estimated changes in carbon stocks from project activities, the 
chosen model must be tested to demonstrate it is appropriate for use in the project area. Such a 
test uses site condition and management history data to predict carbon stocks that reflect the 
consequence of past management actions and conditions, such as rainfall, plant species 
composition, grazing intensity and fire history. This predicted carbon stock is compared to 
current, measured carbon stocks and the accuracy and precision of the predictions must be 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 9 
demonstrated within subareas (strata) of the project area that differ strongly in past conditions or 
in management activities. The details of the model test are presented in section 8.1.3.3.   
Following the model test, soil carbon dynamics are modeled for the project area to estimate the 
maximum SOC that would likely have occurred for the 10 years prior to the project start date, as 
the baseline SOC. The same model is then used to calculate an expected future equilibrium SOC 
under proposed project activities, the time in years to reach this equilibrium, and the average 
annual increment in SOC sequestration expected under the proposed project activities. The 
statistics of variation needed to calculate uncertainties for each parameter in the model are also 
required in order to determine an overall uncertainty in the model calculations of SOC through a 
Monte Carlo simulation analysis. Uncertainty in the difference between maximum SOC in the past 
10 years and an expected future equilibrium SOC will be used to determine any potential 
uncertainty deduction (section 8.4.4). 
2.4 
Leakage 
Emissions from leakage primarily occur from the displacement of current activities inside the 
project area to areas outside the project area. For this proposed methodology, leakage would 
occur primarily by displacement of livestock to other grazing lands in which grazing would result 
in loss of soil carbon and/or increased methane emissions. Such displacement is limited by the 
applicability conditions for the methodology, but where displacement does occur leakage 
emissions must be quantified according to the procedures within the methodology.