7 ADDITIONALITY 
This methodology uses a project method for the demonstration of additionality. 
7.1 
Regulatory Surplus 
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements set out in the most recent versions of the VCS Standard and VCS Methodology 
Requirements.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to Section 7.2 (barrier 
analysis and/or investment analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.  
7.2 
Barrier Analysis and/or Investment Analysis 
Project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of the most recent version of 
VCS tool VT0008 Additionality Assessment to conduct either a barrier analysis (Step 2) or an 
investment analysis (Step 3). Project proponents may choose to apply both analyses to further 
strengthen the additionality demonstration. 
Project proponents implementing multiple project activities may conduct the barrier analysis 
and/or investment analysis across the suite of activities. 
Where the project proponent demonstrates that all conditions of either the barrier analysis or 
the investment analysis per VT0008 are met, proceed to Section 7.3 (common practice 
analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.  
7.3 
Common Practice Analysis 
The project proponent must determine whether each proposed project activity is common 
practice in each region included within the project spatial boundary. To be eligible, each main 
project activity8 and any optional project activities9 included in the project must not be common 
practice (i.e., must not have a penetration rate greater than 20% adoption10).  
Project proponents must use the historical look-back period as set out in Section 6 to 
determine regional common practice. 
 
8 Main project activities are exclusively those that improve irrigation management practices resulting in CH 4 emission 
reductions from methanogenesis; see Applicability Condition 1 in Section 4. 
9 Optional project activities are management practices that further reduce CH4 emissions and/or that reduce N2O 
and/or CO2 emissions. 
10 The precedent for a common practice threshold of greater than 20% is established in Section 5.5.3 of VT0008 
Additionality Assessment, v1.0. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
17 
Evidence must be provided in the form of publicly available information contained in:   
1) agricultural census or other government (e.g., survey) data; 
2) peer-reviewed scientific literature; 
3) independent research data; 
4) attestation statement from a qualified independent local expert (e.g., accredited 
agronomists affiliated with official agricultural institutions supporting rice production 
such as the International Rice Research Institute, IRRI); 
5) grower surveys conducted within the project region; 
6) reports or assessments compiled by industry associations; or 
7) data compiled using remote sensing datasets. 
To demonstrate common practice, the project area must be stratified to the state or provincial 
level (or equivalent second-order jurisdiction) in the countries where the project is being 
developed. Where supporting evidence is unavailable at the state/provincial level (e.g., in 
developing countries), aggregated data or evidence at a national or regional level may be used 
with justification. Where stratification based on geopolitical boundaries is impractical (e.g., due 
to lack of data), other forms of stratification, such as major soil types or cropping zones (i.e., 
dominant production system defined by regional or local climatic conditions), may be used with 
justification. The same stratification approach and data sources must be applied across the 
entire project to maintain the integrity of the common practice demonstration. Where a data 
source is unavailable for a subset of the project region, justification must be provided for use of 
a different data source. 
When conducting the common practice analysis, activities that are under validation or 
registered under the VCS Program are excluded from determining the penetration rate. 
Activities under other GHG programs may optionally be excluded.11 
Where the main project activity and optional project activities are not common practice, and the 
steps of additionality analysis are satisfied, the proposed project activity is additional. 
Otherwise, the project activity is not additional and is not eligible for crediting. 
 
11 The precedent for the exclusion of activities registered under the VCS Program and other GHG programs is 
established in Section 5.5.3 of VT0008 Additionality Assessment, v1.0.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
18