8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS  
8.1 
 Summary 
This methodology provides three approaches to quantify GHG emission reductions from the 
sources included in the project boundary (Table 2) due to the adoption of improved 
management practices in rice production. The project proponent must demonstrate that 
implementing a proposed practice improves the pre-existing practice within the rice production 
system in the project region. 
Baseline and project emissions are defined in terms of flux of CH4, N2O, and CO2 in tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2e) per unit area per monitoring period. Within each 
quantification unit, emission changes in each included source are treated on a per unit basis in 
accounting procedures. Section 8.5 provides equations using total emission changes in the 
project to quantify net reductions. Where a verification period spans multiple calendar years, 
the equations quantify reductions by year to appropriately define vintage periods.  
The entire project area is divided into multiple quantification units that must be more 
homogeneous than the project area in its entirety for the purpose of estimating emission 
reductions (e.g., similar management activities and biophysical conditions; see  for further 
details on defining the cultivation pattern and stratifying the project area). 
The allowable approaches for quantifying CH4, N2O, and CO2 emissions by GHG source are 
listed in Table 4. A project may employ multiple quantification approaches provided that the 
same approach is used for both the project and baseline scenarios for the given GHG source 
within the given monitoring period.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
19
Table 4. Summary of quantification approaches 
GHG 
Source 
Quantification 
Approach 1: 
Modeling 
Quantification 
Approach 2: 
Direct 
Measurement 
Quantification 
Approach 3: 
Default Emission 
Factors 
CH4 
Soil methanogenesis 
X 
X 
X 
CH4, 
N2O 
Biomass burning 
 
 
X 
N2O 
Use of nitrogen 
fertilizers, including 
nitrogen from rice straw 
(crop residue) 
X 
 
X 
CO2 
Fossil fuels 
 
 
X 
CO2 
Liming 
 
 
X 
CO2 
SOC* 
X* 
 
 
*This methodology does not credit removals (i.e., SOC stock increase). However, where Quantification 
Approach 1 is used, the SOC pool must be modeled. 
Three quantification approaches are available under this methodology, described below. 
Quantification Approach 1 (QA1): Modeling of Soil Methanogenesis and Nitrous Oxide Fluxes 
An acceptable model is used to estimate GHG flux following the requirements and procedures 
in VM0042 and VMD0053. The requirements for demonstrating the selection of an acceptable 
model are detailed in Section 2.5.1 of the VCS Methodology Requirements, v4.4. It must be 
demonstrated that the model domain sufficiently covers any potential flux changes in CH4 (soil 
methanogenesis) and N2O (if modeled) associated with the implementation of project activities, 
including changes in the water regime, cultivation period (duration), fertilization practices, and 
changes in rice varieties.  
Neither initial nor periodic measurements of CH4 and N2O fluxes are required as part of project 
monitoring. High-quality observed experimental data on soil CH4 and N2O emissions from 
controlled research trials or approved data sources as described in VMD0053 are required for 
model calibration (see Section 5.1 of VMD0053, v2.0) and validation (see Section 5.2.3 of 
VMD0053, v2.0). Measured datasets must be drawn from peer-reviewed and published 
experimental datasets with measurements of N2O and CH4 fluxes, ideally using control plots to 
test the impact of practice change on GHG fluxes. Datasets may also be drawn from a 
benchmark database maintained by a third party or from measurements made within the 
project boundary, where approved by the independent modeling expert (see Appendix 1 of 
VMD0053, v2.0). 
Other GHG fluxes not covered by the model domain (such as CO2 due to liming, CO2 from fossil 
fuel usage, and avoided biomass burning) must be accounted for using the default emission 
factor approach (QA3). 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
20 
Quantification Approach 2 (QA2): Direct Measurement of Soil Methanogenesis 
Direct flux chamber measurements are used to quantify flux in CH4 emissions from soil 
methanogenesis. This approach is relevant where models are unavailable or have not yet been 
validated or parameterized, or where project proponents prefer to use a direct measurement 
approach for CH4 emissions.  
QA2 must be used where the project is implementing any of the following: 
1) Use of methanotrophs 
2) Application of biochar 
3) Planting low-emission rice varieties 
4) AWD to a depth of less than 10 cm below the soil level, as recommended by a project 
expert 
QA2 requires establishing baseline control sites which are linked to one or more quantification 
units to directly measure and remeasure CH4 emissions in the baseline scenario and project 
activity. The guidance for directly measuring CH4 using flux chambers is outlined in Appendix 2. 
All other GHG fluxes (e.g., N2O from fertilizers, CO2 from liming, CO2 from energy usage, and 
combustion emissions related to avoided biomass burning) must be accounted for and 
quantified by using either QA1 or QA3.  
Quantification Approach 3 (QA3): Default Emission Factors (Global/Regional/Country-Specific) 
Baseline and project emissions are calculated for quantification units using applicable default 
emission factors. Flux in CH4 from biomass burning and CO2 from both fossil fuel usage and 
liming is calculated using emission factors and guidance in the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories with specific equations and additional 
guidance contained in this methodology. Flux in CH4 from soils and in N2O from nitrogen 
fertilizers or rice straw management may optionally also follow this approach. However, where 
default emission factors are not available for these sources, one of the other quantification 
approaches must be used. For N2O emissions, emission factors for nitrification inhibitors and 
enhanced efficiency fertilizers may be derived from the literature. The most accurate and 
geographically specific emission factor applicable to the project must be used from the 
following (listed in descending order of preference): 
1) Where available, a project-specific emission factor from a peer-reviewed scientific 
publication12 must be used. 
2) Where there is no relevant peer-reviewed scientific literature, the project proponent may 
propose alternative sources of information (e.g., government databases, industry 
publications) to establish the default factor(s) and must provide evidence that the 
 
12 As stated in Section 2.5 of the VCS Methodology Requirements, v4.4, peer-reviewed scientific literature used to 
derive (default) emission factors must be published in a journal indexed in the Web of Science: Science Citation Index. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
21
alternative source of information is robust and credible (e.g., independent expert 
attestation). This approach must not be used for CH4 and N2O from soils. 
3) Where no alternative information source is available that is applicable to the project 
conditions, projects may derive emission factors using peer-reviewed scientific 
literature following the guidance to derive Tier 2 emission factors in the respective 
sections of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories.  
4) Where projects have an emission capacity limit13 equal to or less than 60 000 t CO2e 
per year, simplified (e.g., global or regional) Tier 1 emission factors for CH4 emission 
from soils from the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories may be used. All other projects must use country-specific 
emission factors for CH4 from soils. 
 
 
 
13 See Section 3.6.9 of VCS Standard, v4.7. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
22 
Figure 1. Equation map of this methodology 
 
 
 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
23 
8.2 
Baseline Emissions 
Baseline quantification must be undertaken following the guidance below and in Sections 
8.2.1–8.2.7.  
Quantification Approach 1 (QA1): Modeling  
The baseline emissions are modeled for each quantification unit. The model serves to project 
future emissions resulting from the schedule of activities in the baseline scenario (derived in 
Section 6 and Appendix 1). Under QA1, direct measurements of SOC stocks are required as 
model inputs for model initialization and, at minimum, at every project crediting renewal 
period.14 Where the project involves the introduction of a new cultivar with a materially different 
root biomass from the cultivar(s) used in the baseline, the project proponent must demonstrate 
that the model domain sufficiently covers such changes. Further guidance on the use of 
biophysical model inputs is given in Section 8.1 and in VM0042 and VMD0053.  
Quantification Approach 2 (QA2): Direct Measurement  
Under this approach, project proponents must perform direct field chamber measurements of 
CH4 fluxes during every cultivation period at baseline control sites and linked quantification 
units (i.e., at the sample unit). One baseline control site may be linked to more than one 
quantification unit provided the control site meets the similarity criteria for each quantification 
unit to which it is linked. Projects must use QA2 for all fields where biochar, methanotrophs, or 
low-emission rice varieties are being implemented.   
Quantification Approach 3 (QA3): Default Emission Factors (Global/Regional/Country-Specific) 
Baseline scenario emissions are calculated using the equations provided based on practices 
established in the schedule of activities (derived in Section 6). These emissions are estimated 
using default emission factors and data are determined for each field at validation.  
8.2.1 Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Fossil Fuel Combustion 
Where CO2 emissions from fossil fuel are included in the project boundary per Table 2, they are 
quantified in the baseline scenario under Quantification Approach 3, using Equations (1) and 
(2). 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= (∑𝐸𝐹𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
𝐽
𝑗=1
)/𝐴𝑖 
(1) 
 
14 Initial measurements of SOC may be conducted at t = 0 or (back-) modeled to t = 0 from measurements collected 
within ±5 years of t = 0. This time frame (5 years) should be shortened where possible. For projects with more than one 
project crediting period (i.e., more than a 10-year cycle), SOC measurements must be taken for each renewal period. For 
further guidance on SOC measurement procedures refer to Section 8.2.1 of VM0042, v2.1 or equivalent section in the 
most recent version. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
24 
Where: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
EFFbsl,i,j,t 
= Carbon dioxide emissions from combustion of fossil fuel type j for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e) 
Ai 
= Area of quantification unit i (ha) 
j 
= Type of fossil fuel (gasoline, diesel, or other) 
 
𝐸𝐹𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑡= 𝐹𝐹𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑡× 𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑗 
(2) 
Where: 
FFCbsl,i,j,t 
= Consumption of fossil fuel type j for quantification unit i in year t in the 
baseline scenario (L) 
EFCO2,j 
= Emission factor for combustion of fossil fuel type j (t CO2e/L) 
8.2.2 Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Liming 
Application of calcitic limestone (CaCO3) or dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) releases bicarbonate 
(HCO3−), which evolves into CO2 and water (H2O) as carbonate limes dissolve. Where one of the 
rice production practices is liming and resulting CO2 emissions are not deemed de minimis, 
emissions are quantified in the baseline scenario using Quantification Approach 3 and 
Equations (3) and (4) or Quantification Approach 1 where the chosen model includes 
estimations of CO2 emissions from liming. 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= 𝐸𝐿𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 /𝐴𝑖 
(3) 
Where: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean carbon dioxide emissions from liming for quantification unit i 
in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
ELbsl,i,t 
= Carbon dioxide emissions from liming for quantification unit i in year t in 
the baseline scenario (t CO2e) 
 
𝐸𝐿𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ((𝑀𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑒,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 × 𝐸𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑒) + (𝑀𝑑𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 × 𝐸𝐹𝑑𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑒)) × 44
12   
(4) 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
25 
Where: 
Mlimestone,bsl,i,t 
= Amount of calcitic limestone (CaCO3) applied to quantification unit i in 
year t in the baseline scenario (t) 
EFlimestone 
= Emission factor for calcitic limestone (0.12) (t C/t limestone) 
Mdolomite,bsl,i,t 
= Amount of dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) applied to quantification unit i in 
year t in the baseline scenario (t) 
EFdolomite 
= Emission factor for dolomite (0.13) (t C/t dolomite) 
44/12   
= Molar mass ratio of carbon dioxide to carbon (dimensionless) 
8.2.3 Methane Emissions from Soil Methanogenesis 
All project proponents must quantify methane emissions from soil methanogenesis in the 
baseline scenario, and may select from Quantification Approaches 1, 2, or 3. Where projects 
with a capacity limit of 60 000 t CO2e per year use QA3, IPCC Tier 1 global or regional emission 
factors may be applied. All other projects must use country-specific emission factors when 
using QA3.  
Quantification Approach 1: Modeling  
Methane emissions are calculated in the baseline scenario using Equation (5):  
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝐺𝑊𝑃CH4 × ʄ(𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡)  
(5) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean methane emissions from soil methanogenesis for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
GWPCH4 
= Global warming potential for methane (t CO2e/t CH4) 
ƒ(CH4_soilbsl,i,t) 
= Modeled methane emissions from soil methanogenesis for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario, calculated by 
modeling soil methane fluxes over the preceding year (t CH4/ha) 
Quantification Approach 2: Direct Measurement  
For projects using Quantification Approach 2, the values in Equation (5) for ƒ(CH4_soilbsl,i,t) 
must be set using the detailed guidance in Section 8.2.4. 
Quantification Approach 3: Default Factors (Global/Regional/Country-Specific) 
For projects using Quantification Approach 3, the values in Equation (5) for ƒ(CH4_soilbsl,i,t) 
must be calculated using Equations (6)–(8). 
Where root biomass changes significantly relative to baseline conditions, the project proponent 
must account for the changes in biomass to soil using Equation (7), unless such change in the 
root biomass is deemed de minimis.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
26 
𝐸𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 =  𝐸𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑐  × 𝑆𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑤× 𝑆𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑝  × 𝑆𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑜  
(6) 
Where: 
EFbsl,i,t 
= 
Adjusted baseline methane emission factor for continuously flooded 
fields without organic amendments for quantification unit i in year t 
(kg CH4/ha/day) 
EFbsl,c 
= 
Baseline methane emission factor for continuously flooded fields without 
organic amendments (kg CH4/ha/day)15 
SCbsl,w 
= 
Baseline scaling factor to account for differences in water regime during 
the cultivation period; scaling factors must be sourced from Table 5.12 
(Updated) in Chapter 5, Volume 4 of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (unitless) 
SCbsl,p 
= 
Baseline scaling factor to account for differences in water regime in the 
pre-season before the cultivation period; scaling factors must be 
sourced from Table 5.13 (Updated) in Chapter 5, Volume 4 of the 2019 
Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories (unitless) 
SCbsl,o 
= 
Baseline scaling factor to account for organic amendments, set using 
Equation (7) (unitless) 
 
𝑆𝐶𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑜 = (1  + ∑𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑎× 𝐶𝐹𝑂𝐴𝑎
𝑎
)
0.59
  
(7) 
Where: 
ROAa 
= Application rate of organic amendment type a, in dry weight for straw 
and fresh weight for others (t/ha)16 
CFOAa 
= Conversion factor for organic amendment type a; must be sourced 
from Table 5.14 (Updated) in Chapter 5, Volume 4 of the 2019 
Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories (unitless) 
 
15 Projects with dynamic baseline activities must use the most conservative baseline assumption from a three-year 
historical look-back period, following the guidance in Section 6, above Table 4. This may mean that a project must set 
EFbsl,c using the emission factor for single drainage.   
16 For the baseline, 5 t/ha of straw is assumed. This should be adjusted where material changes to biomass 
management occur in the project, such as increased biomass to soils. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
27 
Methane emissions are calculated in the baseline scenario using Equation (8): 
𝐵𝐸𝐶𝐻4,𝑖,𝑡= 𝐸𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐿𝑡× 10−3 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4  
(8) 
Where: 
BECH4,i,t 
= Baseline emissions of methane from soils for quantification unit i in 
year t (t CO2e/ha) 
Lt 
= Cultivation period of rice in year t (days)17 
8.2.4 Direct Measurement of Methane Emissions 
Where project proponents adopt Quantification Approach 2, direct measurements of methane 
emissions are made using chamber measurements following the requirements and guidance in 
this section and in Appendix 2.  
The following guidance is structured according to the procedures for field measurement (see 
Appendix 2) to derive emission factors for each cultivation period specific to the project. Project 
proponents must make sure that the flux calculations are developed and supervised by experts 
in this domain or at least experienced staff trained by experts (e.g., from research institutions, 
governmental agricultural bodies). For each measurement event, the average hourly CH4 fluxes 
in a sample unit are calculated using Equations (9)–(12): 
𝑚𝐶𝐻4,𝑝𝑡= 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝐶𝐻4,𝑝𝑡× 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑐ℎ× 𝑀𝐶𝐻4 ×
1 𝑎𝑡𝑚
𝑅× 𝑇𝑝𝑡× 1000 
(9) 
Where: 
mCH4,pt 
= 
Mass of methane in chamber at time pt (mg) 
pt 
= 
Point of time at which sample is taken (e.g., 0, 15, 30 in case of three 
samples within 30 minutes) 
ConcCH4,pt 
= 
Methane concentration in chamber at time pt (ppm) 
Volch 
= 
Volume of chamber ch (L) 
MCH4 
= 
Molar mass of methane (16) (g/mol) 
1 atm 
= 
Assume constant pressure of 1 atm, unless pressure measurement 
equipment is installed 
R 
= 
Universal gas constant (0.08206) (L atm/K/mol) 
Tpt 
= 
Temperature at time pt (K) 
 
17 Each cultivation period commences at land preparation and continues until whichever comes later, harvest or post-
season drainage.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
28 
Determine the slope of the line of best fit for describing the relationship between mCH4,pt and pt 
using Equation (10). 
𝑠𝑙= ∆𝑚𝐶𝐻4,𝑝𝑡
∆𝑝𝑡
 
(10) 
Where: 
sl 
= Slope of line of best fit (mg/min) 
The hourly flux must be calculated for each chamber measurement in a sample unit:18 
𝐹𝑐ℎ= 𝑠𝑙× 60𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝐴𝑐ℎ
 
(11) 
Where: 
Fch 
= Flux of chamber ch (mg/m2/h) 
ch 
= Index for replicate chamber on a sample unit  
Ach 
= Basal area of chamber ch (m2) 
Calculate the mean hourly flux in a sample unit: 
𝐹𝑓= 
∑
𝐹𝑐ℎ
𝑁𝑐ℎ
𝑐ℎ=1
𝑁𝑐ℎ
 
(12) 
Where: 
Ff 
= Mean flux for sample unit f (mg/m2/h) 
Nch 
= Number of replicate chambers per sample unit 
Further Procedure for Calculation of Seasonally Integrated Emission Factor 
Once an average emission rate has been calculated for each sample unit, a seasonally 
integrated emission factor must be calculated by integration of the results of each 
measurement event over the season length (i.e., cultivation period). The simplest way of 
integration is multiplying the average emission rate for each sample unit by the number of 
hours in the measurement interval (e.g., one week = 168 hours) and accumulating the results 
of every measurement interval over the season. Convert from mg/m2 to t/ha by multiplying by 
10−5. This procedure is outlined in Equations (13)–(15). 
 
18 This methodology does not prescribe the ideal number of replicate chambers per sample unit. A project expert must 
determine whether more than one replicate chamber per sample unit is required to minimize the measurement error. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
29 
Calculate the total emissions in one measurement interval z:  
𝐸𝑓,𝑧= (𝐹𝑓,𝑧+ 𝐹𝑓,𝑧+1) ×  24ℎ × 𝐷𝑧
2
 
(13) 
Where: 
Ef,z 
= Total emissions in sample unit f in interval z (mg/m2) 
z 
= Index for weekly measurement interval in season s 
Fz 
= Hourly flux at the start of interval z (mg/m2/h) 
Fz+1 
= Hourly flux rate at the end of interval z (mg/m2/h) 
Dz 
= Number of days in interval z (d) 
 
Note – CH4 flux on planting day and on harvest day may be assumed to be zero where 
measurement is not implemented on those days. 
Calculate the emission factor in sample unit f in season s: 
𝐸𝑓,𝑠= ∑
𝐸𝑓,𝑧
𝑁
𝑧=1
 
(14) 
Where: 
Ef,s 
= 
Total methane emissions in sample unit f in season s (mg/m2) 
N 
= 
Number of measurement intervals z in season s 
Calculate the emission factor for methane in quantification unit i in season s: 
𝐸𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑠= 
∑
𝐸𝑓,𝑠× 10−5
𝑁𝐹
𝑓=1
𝑁𝐹
 
(15) 
Where: 
EFbsl,i,s 
= 
Emission factor of methane in quantification unit i in season s (t CH4/ha) 
NF 
= 
Number of sample units f in quantification unit i 
Methane emissions are calculated in the baseline scenario using Equation (16): 
𝐵𝐸𝐶𝐻4,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝐸𝐹𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑠
𝑆
𝑠
× 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 
(16) 
Where: 
BECH4,i,t 
= Baseline emissions of methane from soils for quantification unit i 
in year t (t CO2e/ha) 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
30 
8.2.5 Methane Emissions from Biomass Burning 
Where CH4 emissions from biomass burning are included in the project boundary per Table 2, 
they are quantified in the baseline scenario under QA3 using Equation (17). 
𝐶𝐻4 _𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡  = (𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 ×  𝑀𝐵𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡× 𝐶𝐹𝑟× 𝐸𝐹𝐶𝐻4
106
) /𝐴𝑖 
(17) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡  
= Areal mean methane emissions from biomass burning for quantification 
unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
GWPCH4 
= Global warming potential for methane (t CO2e/t CH4) 
MBbsl,i,t 
= Mass of rice straw burned for quantification unit i in year t in the baseline 
scenario (kg) 
CFr 
= Combustion factor for rice straw expressed as proportion of pre-fire fuel 
biomass consumed (fraction) 
EFCH4 
= Methane emission factor for the burning of rice straw (g CH4/kg dry 
matter burned) 
106 
= Conversion factor from grams to tonnes 
8.2.6 Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Nitrogen Fertilizers  
Where N2O emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils from nitrogen fertilizers and rice straw are 
included in the project boundary per Table 2, they are quantified in the baseline scenario using 
the equations below. Nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrification/denitrification include N2O 
emissions from nitrogen fertilizers and from nitrogen derived from rice straw.  
Where using QA1 and the model domain covers N2O flux from both fertilizers and rice straw 
incorporation, only Equation (18) should be used, applying model outputs. Where the model 
domain does not include both of these sources, Equations (19)–(22) and default emission 
factors for the given source must be used to generate inputs for Equation (18).  
Quantification Approach 1 
In Quantification Approach 1, N2O emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils (nitrogen fertilizers) 
in the baseline scenario are quantified as: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂× ʄ (𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) 
(18) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= 
Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
GWPN2O 
= 
Global warming potential for nitrous oxide (t CO2e/t N2O) 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
31
ƒ(N20_soilbsl,i,t) 
= 
Modeled nitrous oxide emissions from soil for quantification unit i in 
year t in the baseline scenario, calculated by modeling soil fluxes of 
nitrogen forms over the preceding year (t N2O/ha) 
Quantification Approach 3 
Where N2O emissions due to fertilizer use are included in the project boundary per Table 2, 
they are quantified in the baseline scenario using Equations (19)–(22).  
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= [(𝐹𝑆𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝐹𝑂𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡+ 𝐹𝐶𝑅𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐸𝐹𝑁] × 44
28 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂/𝐴𝑖 
(19) 
𝐹𝑆𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝑀𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑆𝐹,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝐶𝑆𝐹
 
𝑆𝐹
 
(20) 
𝐹𝑂𝑁𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝑀𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑂𝐹,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐹  
 
𝑂𝐹
 
(21) 
𝐹𝐶𝑅𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡= ∑𝑀𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝐶𝑅,𝑖,𝑡× 𝑁𝐶𝐶𝑅  
 
𝐶𝑅
 
(22) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils 
for quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
FSNbsl,i,t 
= Total nitrogen applied to quantification unit i in year t as synthetic 
nitrogen fertilizer in the baseline scenario (t N) 
FONbsl,i,t 
= Total nitrogen applied to quantification unit i in year t as organic 
nitrogen fertilizer in the baseline scenario (t N) 
FCRbsl,i,t 
= Total nitrogen applied to quantification unit i in year t as crop residue 
(aboveground and belowground) nitrogen fertilizer in the baseline 
scenario (t N)19 
EFN 
= Emission factor for nitrous oxide emissions from nitrogen additions 
from synthetic fertilizers, organic amendments, and crop residues in 
flooded rice (t N2O-N/t N applied) 
Mbsl,SF,i,t 
= Mass of nitrogen-containing synthetic fertilizer type SF applied to 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t) 
NCSF 
= Nitrogen content of synthetic fertilizer type SF (t N/t fertilizer) 
 
19 This must include nitrogen from any crop residues left in the field over the off-season period. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
32 
Mbsl,OF,i,t 
= Mass of nitrogen-containing organic fertilizer type OF applied to 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t) 
NCOF 
= Nitrogen content of organic fertilizer type OF (t N/t fertilizer) 
Mbsl,CR,i,t 
= Total dry mass of rice straw returned to soils (aboveground and 
belowground) in quantification unit i in year t in the baseline 
scenario (t dry mass) 
NCCR 
= Nitrogen content in dry mass of crop residue type CR (above- and 
belowground) before the rice season (t N/t dry mass) 
SF 
= Synthetic nitrogen fertilizer type 
OF 
= Organic nitrogen fertilizer type 
CR 
= Crop residue type (e.g., rice straw) 
44/28 
= Molar mass ratio of nitrous oxide to nitrogen 
8.2.7 Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Biomass Burning 
Where N2O emissions from biomass burning are included in the project boundary per Table 2, 
they are quantified in the baseline scenario under QA3 using Equation (23). 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡  = (𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂× 𝑀𝐵𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡×  𝐶𝐹𝑟× 𝐸𝐹 𝑁2𝑂
106
) /𝐴𝑖 
(23) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions from biomass burning for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
GWPN2O 
= Global warming potential for nitrous oxide (t CO2e/t N2O) 
MBbsl,i,t 
= Mass of agricultural residues of rice straw burned for 
quantification unit i in year t in the baseline scenario (kg) 
CFr 
= Combustion factor for rice straw expressed as proportion of pre-
fire fuel biomass consumed (fraction) 
EFN2O 
= Nitrous oxide emission factor for the burning of rice straw 
(g N2O/kg dry matter burned) 
106 
= Conversion factor from grams to tonnes 
8.3 
Project Emissions  
Emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O resulting from project scenario rice cultivation activities are 
calculated or modeled based on monitored inputs following the approaches found in Table 4 
and using the equations provided in Section 8.2. For all equations, the subscript bsl must be 
substituted with wp to indicate that the relevant values are being calculated for the project 
scenario.  
In addition to the equations in Section 8.2, other GHG emission sources must be accounted for 
when implementing any of the following project activities:   
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
33 
1) Where rice straw burning is reduced, project proponents must account for emissions 
associated with the alternative fate of the rice straw (using Equation (24)).  
2) Where irrigation practices are changed, project proponents must account for N2O 
emissions associated with such changes by applying an N2O correction factor (using 
Equation (25)).  
8.3.1 Project Emissions from Diverting Rice Straw to Alternative End-Uses 
Where a project materially reduces the amount of rice straw burned, Equation (24) must be 
used to account for project emissions associated with alternative end uses of the rice straw.  
𝑃𝐸𝐴𝐵,𝑡= (𝑅𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑,𝑟× 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑢,𝑟×  0.001)  
(24) 
Where: 
PEAB,t 
= Project emissions from diverting rice straw to alternative off-farm end uses 
in year t (t CO2e) 
RSremoved,r 
= Mass of rice straw removed from field and sent to end use category r 
(t d.m.) 
EFeu,r 
= Emission factor for rice straw for off-farm end use category r (kg CO2e/t dry 
rice straw) 
0.001 
= Unit conversion from kilogram to tonne 
8.3.2 Project Emissions of Nitrous Oxide Due to Irrigation Change 
All fields that employ changes in irrigation patterns from continuous flooding to AWD (single or 
multiple drainage) must account for N2O emissions associated with such changes by applying 
an N2O correction factor, regardless of whether there are any changes in the application rate of 
nitrogen.20  
𝑃𝐸𝑅𝑒𝑑−𝐼𝑟𝑟𝑖,𝑡= ∑
(𝑄𝑁,𝑖 × 𝐴𝑖) × 𝐶𝐹𝑁2𝑂× 10−3 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(25) 
Where: 
PERed-Irri,t 
= Deduction to account for flux in nitrous oxide emissions due to period 
of drying on rice fields in year t (t CO2e) 
QN,i 
= Application rate of nitrogen input for quantification unit i in the project 
scenario (kg N/ha)  
 
20 Where project activities include changes (increase or decrease) in N fertilization rates, N2O emissions must be 
calculated using the equations in Section 8.2.6. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
34 
CFN2O 
= Nitrous oxide correction factor for calculating nitrous oxide emissions 
flux due to period of drying on rice fields; value of 0.00314 must be 
used21 (kg N2O/kg N-input) 
10−3 
= Unit conversion from kilogram to tonne 
8.4 
Leakage Emissions 
Improved rice production projects may result in leakage through: 
• 
new application of organic amendments from outside the project area (i.e., organic 
amendments applied in the project from outside of the project area that were not 
previously applied in the historical look-back period);  
• 
declines in rice yield; and/or  
• 
diversion of biomass residues that were used for bioenergy applications in the pre-
project scenario.  
Guidance on how to account for each type of leakage is provided below. 
Where the sum of increases in GHG emissions from any leakage source is less than 5% of the 
total reductions due to the project activities, such sources may be deemed de minimis and may 
be ignored. This demonstration must be conducted via application of the CDM Tool for Testing 
Significance of GHG Emissions in A/R CDM Project Activities. 
8.4.1 Leakage from New Application of Organic Amendments from Outside the 
Project Area 
Where new22 or additional23 manure, compost, or biosolids are applied in the project that were 
not applied in the historical look-back period, there is a risk of activity-shifting leakage. To 
account for this type of leakage, a deduction must be used unless any of the following apply: 
1) The manure or compost applied in the project is produced on-site from farms within the 
project area. 
2) The manure is documented to have been diverted from an uncontrolled anaerobic 
lagoon, pond, tank, or pit from which there is no recovery of CH4 for generation of heat 
and/or electricity. 
 
21 The correction factor is derived from the emission factors (kg N2O-N/t N) from Table 11.1 (Updated), Chapter 11, 
Volume 4 in the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The difference 
between the aggregated default value emission factors for continuously flooded rice fields and rice fields with single or 
multiple drainage was converted from N2O-N into N2O emissions. See Appendix 3 for further details.   
22 In this context, “new” refers to organic amendment application to fields that did not have organic amendment applied 
during the historical look-back period. 
23 In this context, “additional” refers to organic amendment application to fields that had organic amendment applied 
during the historical look-back period, where the amount of organic amendment increases in the project scenario. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
35 
3) The manure, compost, or biosolids are documented to not have been used as a soil 
amendment. 
The deduction represents the portion of manure, compost, or biosolids carbon that remains in 
the project area without degrading and which would have otherwise been applied to agricultural 
land outside of the project area. 
Equation (26) estimates the leakage from imported manure, compost, or biosolids that are 
diverted from other applications and could have led to an increase in SOC outside the project 
boundary in the absence of the project activity. The total amount of carbon applied is reduced 
to 12% based on the global manure C retention coefficient from Maillard and Angers (2014). 
This value reflects the fraction of manure carbon expected to remain in the project area. While 
derived for manure, the equation is also conservatively applied to compost and biosolids in this 
methodology.  
𝐿𝐸𝑂𝐴,𝑡= ∑(𝑀_𝑂𝐴𝑤𝑝,𝑙,𝑡× 𝐶𝐶𝑤𝑝,𝑙,𝑡× 0.12 × 44
12)
𝑙
 
(26) 
Where: 
LEOA,t 
= Leakage from organic amendments in year t (t CO2e) 
M_OAwp,l,t 
= Mass of organic amendment (from livestock type l) applied as fertilizer in 
the project area in year t (t) 
CCwp,l,t 
= Carbon content of organic amendment applied as fertilizer in the project 
area in year t, disaggregated by livestock type I for manure (t C/t organic 
amendment) 
0.12 
= Fraction of manure carbon expected to remain in project area soils 
(Maillard and Angers 2014); also applied to other organic amendments 
(unitless) 
44/12 
= Molar mass ratio of carbon dioxide to carbon 
Note – as set out in Section 4, project activities that result in a material decline in the volume 
of biomass to soils in the project are ineligible under this methodology.  
8.4.2 Leakage from Rice Yield Declines 
Market leakage (LEyield) is likely to be negligible because the land remains in rice production in 
the project scenario. Further, producers are unlikely to implement and maintain rice production 
practices that result in productivity declines, since their livelihoods depend on rice yield as a 
source of income. Nevertheless, to ensure leakage does not occur, the following steps must be 
completed during the first monitoring period. Where material leakage is detected, the steps 
must be repeated each season of the project until no material yield decrease is detected. 
Where no material decrease in yield is detected, these steps need not be repeated until the 
first monitoring period of the subsequent crediting period.  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
36 
Step 1: Demonstrate that rice yield has not declined by more than 5% in the monitoring period 
by one of the following: 
1) Comparing average rice yield during the monitoring period (excluding years with 
extreme weather events) with average baseline rice yield during the historical look-back 
period, using Equation (27): 
∆𝑃= (𝑃𝑤𝑝− 𝑃𝑏𝑠𝑙
𝑃𝑏𝑠𝑙
) × 100 
(27) 
Where: 
ΔP 
= 
Change in productivity (%) 
Pwp 
= 
Average rice yield during the monitoring period (output/ha) 
Pbsl 
= 
Average rice yield during the historical look-back period (output/ha) 
Or 
2) Comparing the ratio of average baseline rice yield to average regional rice yield during 
the historical look-back period with the ratio of average monitoring period rice yield to 
average regional rice yield during the monitoring period, using Equation (28) and 
regional data from government, industry, peer-reviewed, academic, or international 
organizations (e.g., Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) or IRRI) sources: 
∆𝑃𝑅= ( 𝑃𝑤𝑝
𝑅𝑃𝑤𝑝
−𝑃𝑏𝑠𝑙 
𝑅𝑃𝑏𝑠𝑙
) × 100 
(28) 
Where: 
ΔPR 
= 
Change in rice yield ratio per hectare (%) 
RPwp 
= 
Average regional rice yield during the monitoring period (output/ha) 
RPbsl 
= 
Average regional rice yield during the historical look-back period 
(output/ha) 
For new rice production techniques introduced as part of the project (e.g., DSR, 
nitrification inhibitors, reduced rice straw burning) that are not present in the historical 
look-back period, project proponents should use regional data sources instead of 
project-specific data sources to determine historical rice yield, and set Pbsl equal to 
RPbsl. 
Monitoring period yield averages must be based on data collected in the previous 10 years. 
Yield averages must not include data that are more than 10 years old. Where yield has 
improved, stayed constant, or declined by less than 5%, no further action is needed and LEyield 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
37
should be set to zero. Where a reduction in yield of greater than 5% is observed, complete Step 
2. 
Step 2: Determine whether the yield decline was caused by a short-term yield decrease by 
repeating the calculation in Step 1 and excluding all data inputs from the first three years of 
project implementation. Where the monitoring period yield with the first three years removed is 
within 5% of the baseline yield, no further action is needed and LEyield should be set to zero. 
Where a reduction in yield of greater than 5% is still observed, complete Step 3. 
Step 3: Determine whether the yield decline is limited to a certain combination of factors by 
stratifying the analysis by: 
1) practice change category, 
2) practice change category combinations, 
3) soil type, and/or 
4) climatic zone. 
Where the yield decline is limited to a certain combination of project implementation activities, 
that combination of project activities becomes ineligible for future crediting, until the yield 
decline is demonstrated to have been remedied. For example, where a 10% decline in rice 
yields is observed and stratification shows that the yield decline is linked to fertilizer rate 
reductions combined with DSR, fertilizer rate reduction practices on DSR fields would no longer 
be eligible for future crediting until the project monitoring plan is updated to include measures 
to address the issue, and until the project proponent demonstrates no leakage has occurred. 
Where a yield decline above 5% is not limited to a certain combination of project 
implementation activities, the portion of the observed yield decline above 5% is used to set the 
value for LEyield. Where the project proponent is unable to isolate the source(s) of leakage 
through stratification, the entire project becomes ineligible for future crediting until the yield 
decline is demonstrated to have been remedied. 
8.4.3 Leakage from Diversion of Biomass Residues Used for Energy Applications in the 
Baseline Scenario 
Where changes in straw management (i.e., due to implementation of avoided biomass burning) 
is a component of the project activity, and this biomass residue is diverted from the project 
area (baseline scenario) to energy applications (e.g., fuel for cookstoves or biomass power 
generation), there is a risk of leakage. Due to implementation of the project activity, these 
competing applications may be forced to use inputs that are not carbon neutral. Leakage 
emissions due to the diversion of biomass residues used in the baseline for renewable fuel 
production (LEBR,t) must be determined following procedures in CDM TOOL16 Project and 
Leakage Emissions from Biomass.24 
 
24 Available at: https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-16-v2.pdf/history_view  
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
38 
8.5 
Net Reductions  
Emission reductions are calculated by subtracting baseline (subscript bsl) from project 
(subscript wp) emissions. Equation (29) is used to calculate net reductions under 
Quantification Approaches 1, 2, and 3. UNCt,CH4_soil and UNCt,N2O_soil must be calculated in 
accordance with the guidance in Section 8.6.4. Projects using Quantification Approach 3 that 
have a capacity limit of 60 000 t CO2e per year must use a 15% default uncertainty deduction.  
𝐸𝑅𝑡= Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑡+ Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑡+ ∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑡
+ (∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡 × (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙,𝑡)) 
+ (∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡 × (1 − 𝑈𝑁𝐶𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙,𝑡)) + ∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑡− 𝐿𝐸𝑂𝐴,𝑡
−𝐿𝐸𝐵𝑅,𝑡− 𝑃𝐸𝐴𝐵,𝑡− 𝑃𝐸𝑅𝑒𝑑−𝐼𝑟𝑟𝑖,𝑡 
(29) 
Where: 
ERt 
= Estimated net reductions in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCO2_fft 
= Total carbon dioxide reductions from fossil fuel combustion in year t 
(t CO2e) 
ΔCO2_limet 
= Total carbon dioxide reductions from liming in year t (t CO2e)  
ΔCH4_bbt 
= Total methane reductions from avoided or reduced biomass burning 
in year t (t CO2e) 
ΔCH4_soilt 
= Total methane reductions from soils in year t (t CO2e) 
UNCCH4_soil,t 
= Uncertainty deduction for methane emissions in year t (fraction 
between 0 and 1) 
ΔN20_soilt 
= Total nitrous oxide reductions from nitrification/denitrification in 
year t (t CO2e) 
UNCN2O_soil,t 
= Uncertainty deduction for nitrous oxide emissions in year t 
ΔN2O_bbt 
= Total nitrous oxide reductions from avoided or reduced biomass 
burning in year t (t CO2e)  
LEBR,t 
= Leakage from diversion of biomass residues used for energy 
application in the baseline scenario, derived from Section 8.4.3 
8.5.1 Fossil Fuel Combustion Emission Reductions (ΔCO2_fft) 
Emissions impacts of changes in fossil fuel usage are quantified as follows:  
Δ𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑡= ∑(  𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡− 𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(30) 
Where: 
𝐶𝑂2_𝑓𝑓𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
= Areal mean carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion 
for quantification unit i in year t in the project scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
39 
8.5.2 Methane Emission Reductions (ΔCH4t) 
Methane reductions from soil methanogenesis are quantified as follows: 
∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡= ∑
(𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡− 𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡)
𝑛
𝑖=1
 × 𝐴𝑖  
(31) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean methane emissions from soil methanogenesis for 
quantification unit i in year t in the project scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
Methane reductions from avoided or reduced biomass burning are quantified as follows: 
∆𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑡= ∑
(𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡− 𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡) 
𝑛
𝑖=1
× 𝐴𝑖  
(32) 
Where: 
𝐶𝐻4_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean methane emissions from biomass burning for 
quantification unit i in year t in the project scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
8.5.3 Nitrous Oxide Emission Reductions (ΔN2Ot) 
Nitrous oxide reductions from nitrification/denitrification are quantified as follows: 
∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑡= ∑
(  𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡− 𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
   
(33) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions due to nitrogen inputs to soils 
for quantification unit i in year t in the project scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
Nitrous oxide reductions from biomass burning are quantified as follows: 
∆𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑡= ∑
(  𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑙,𝑖,𝑡− 𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡) × 𝐴𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
  
(34) 
Where: 
𝑁2𝑂_𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑝,𝑖,𝑡 
= Areal mean nitrous oxide emissions from biomass burning for 
quantification unit i in year t in the project scenario (t CO2e/ha) 
8.6 
Uncertainty 
Uncertainty deductions are estimated separately for each GHG source within a project. 
Deductions are based on an estimate of the total error of the project’s calculated reductions for 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
40 
that source over a given verification period. Key sources of uncertainty that contribute to this 
error differ for each quantification approach. This section details these sources of error and 
methods to estimate such errors for use in an uncertainty assessment and calculation of the 
required uncertainty deduction. 
Under Quantification Approaches 1 and 2, the uncertainty guidance provided here assumes 
that all gas sampling/analysis and modeling occurs on a point basis. In other words, the model 
results and/or direct gas sample measurements each represent a single point in space at which 
initial management data have been collected, and uncertainty is calculated by combining 
estimates of sampling, modeling, and measurement error based on the design chosen to select 
the points. Alternative approaches (e.g., modeling on an areal basis) are considered a deviation 
and project proponents must demonstrate that such approaches will not negatively impact the 
conservativeness of reduction estimates per the most recent version of the VCS Standard.25 
Across Quantification Approaches 1 and 2, a key source of error is sampling error, which emerges 
from only being able to measure/model a portion of the total project area. Appropriate estimates 
of this source of error are specific to the sample design employed.  
This methodology requires stratification of the project area. Each stratum should be based on 
physical and management factors (see Appendix 2) that minimize within-stratum variability. 
Data from each quantification unit must be collected for all three quantification approaches. 
Under QA2, control sites must be allocated within each stratum based on recommendations 
from an expert; refer to Appendix 3 for details on direct gas chamber measurements. The 
remainder of this section is based on a simplified example of a stratified random sampling design 
in which the entire project is divided into strata and points within those strata are placed using 
simple random sampling with replacement.  
8.6.1 Quantification Approach 1 
Quantification Approach 1 is a modeling approach in which a biogeochemical model is used to 
simulate changes in CH4 and/or N2O fluxes over a given time period in both the project and 
baseline scenarios. Initial measurements of SOC must be taken at the project start26 and used 
for model initialization. Project proponents must follow the guidance in VMD0053 and Section 
8.6.1 of VM0042, v2.127 with respect to uncertainty calculations while using modeling under 
Quantification Approach 1.  
Key sources of error accounted for under Quantification Approach 1 include: 
 
25 Section 3.20 in the VCS Standard, v4.7 
26 Initial measurements of SOC may be conducted at t = 0 or (back-) modeled to t = 0 from measurements collected 
within ±5 years of t = 0. This time frame (5 years) should be shortened where possible. For projects with more than one 
project crediting period (i.e., more than a 10-year cycle), SOC measurements must be taken for each crediting renewal 
period.  
27 Or equivalent section in the most recent version 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
41 
• 
Model prediction error resulting from uncertainty in model parameters or model 
structural errors (i.e., inaccurate representation of actual biogeochemical processes). 
Model prediction error is calculated using independent statistical validation datasets 
per the processes outlined in VMD0053. Alternatively, project proponents may account 
for model prediction error by calibrating models to include parameter uncertainty (e.g., 
a Bayesian implementation of the model) and using the Monte Carlo simulation or error 
propagation approach.  
• 
Sampling error resulting from measuring/modeling only a portion of the project area. 
Estimates of sampling error are contingent on the sampling design employed by the 
project proponent.  
• 
Measurement error of model inputs. In many cases, the impact of these measurement 
errors on the error of reduction estimates is assumed to be captured in model 
prediction error and/or sampling error. In this case, Monte Carlo simulation is required 
unless it is demonstrated that such errors have a de minimis effect on model estimates 
of reductions. 
For each GHG flux, these sources of error are estimated separately and then combined to 
estimate a single uncertainty deduction for that GHG flux across the entire project. Two 
approaches are eligible to estimate the uncertainty: 
1) Analytical calculation of error propagation 
2) Monte Carlo simulation 
Guidance on performing a Monte Carlo simulation is found in Section 8.6.1.1 of VM0042, 
v2.1.28  
8.6.2 Quantification Approach 2 
Quantification Approach 2 is applicable for CH4 flux measurements. The baseline is 
represented by control sites that are linked to one or more strata. The CH4 flux difference and 
its uncertainty is calculated based on comparisons of control sites and paired strata. Key 
sources of error accounted for under QA2 include: 
• 
Sampling error derived from only measuring a subset of the entire project area, 
resulting in a potentially inaccurate estimate of the true variance of CH4 flux. Sampling 
error is determined by calculating the approximate standard error of CH4 flux as directly 
measured following the guidance in Appendix 2.  
• 
Measurement error of methods used to determine CH4 flux measurements at sample 
points. Where samples are collected in accordance with the guidance in Appendix 3 
and tested in a laboratory with demonstrated proficiency and quality control (e.g., 
 
28 Ibid. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
42 
through participation in the North American Proficiency Testing program), these errors 
are assumed to be unbiased and negligible.   
These sources of error are estimated separately and then combined to estimate a single 
uncertainty deduction for CH4 flux across the entire project. Similar to QA1, an analytical error 
propagation or Monte Carlo simulation method may be used. The Monte Carlo simulation 
method is more appropriate in cases where measurement error is deemed significant and must 
be propagated through calculations.  
The various sources of error outlined above are independently estimated for each CH4 flux that 
results in a reduction. The estimated errors are then combined to provide an estimate of the 
total variance of the areal mean reductions across the project for each source in each 
verification period (𝑠Δ•
̅̅̅̅,𝑡
2
). This is used to determine an appropriate uncertainty deduction.  
This section is based on a stratified random sampling design in which the entire project area is 
divided into strata, and sites for gas measurements (i.e., baseline control sites and sample 
units) are allocated within each stratum.29 Methane flux measurements are collected at these 
points in the quantification units and/or control sites. Formulas for uncertainty estimators are 
drawn from Som (1995, ch. 10). Project-specific strata, their area, and the sampling points 
(quantification units and/or control sites) within strata must be reported in a spreadsheet and 
submitted as an annex to project documentation at every verification. This information feeds 
into Equation (35) for the parameters stratum identifier (h), area of stratum (Ah), and sample 
point identifier (ip).  
𝑆𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,∆•,𝑡
2
= ∑𝑆𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,∆•,ℎ,𝑡
2
𝐻
ℎ=1
 
(35) 
Where: 
𝑆𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,∆• ,ℎ,𝑡
2
=
𝐴ℎ
2
𝑛ℎ(𝑛ℎ−1) ∑(∆• ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑡−∆• ℎ,𝑡)
2
𝑛ℎ
𝑖𝑝=1
 
(36) 
And: 
𝑆𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,∆•,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of reductions in gas • due to sampling error at time t 
across the entire project area (t CO2e)2 
𝑆𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,∆• ,ℎ,𝑡
2
 
= Variance of reductions in gas • within stratum h due to sampling 
error at time t (t CO2e)2 
∆• ℎ,𝑡 
= Areal mean reduction in gas • in stratum h at time t, computed as 
the average across the sample points in stratum h (t CO2e/ha) 
 
29 While applying random sampling, the selection of sites for gas measurements should consider site accessibility, and 
the project proponent must justify the choice of sampling allocation. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
43 
∆• ℎ,𝑖𝑝,𝑡 
= Estimated reduction in gas • on an area basis in year t in stratum 
h at point ip (t CO2e/ha) 
h 
= 1, …, H strata across the entire project area 
ip 
= 1, …, nh sample points (gas chamber) within stratum h 
Ah 
= Area of stratum h 
The variance of Δ •𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅ incorporating sample uncertainty is estimated by dividing the variance 
estimates of error sources by the square of the total project area (Cochran 1977, Eq. 13.39; 
Som 1995, Eq. 25.10).  
𝑆Δ•
̅̅̅̅,𝑡
2
=
𝑆s𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,Δ•,𝑡
2
 
𝐴2
 
(37) 
Where: 
𝑆Δ•
̅̅̅̅,𝑡
2  
= Variance of the estimate of mean reductions in gas • at time t 
(t CO2e/ha)2 
A 
= Total project area (ha) 
8.6.3 Quantification Approach 3 
The uncertainty approach for CH4 and N2O from soils varies depending on emission factor tiers 
and project scale. Project proponents using global or regional IPCC Tier 1 emission factors for 
projects with a capacity limit of 60 000 t CO2e per year must apply a standardized default 
uncertainty deduction of 15%. Project proponents using country-specific emission factors for 
projects with estimated reductions above 60 000 t CO2e per year must calculate the 
uncertainty associated with the applied emission factors.  
Project proponents may derive country-specific emission factors using literature, following the 
guidance to derive Tier 2 emission factors in the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Uncertainty estimates must be derived from the 
source literature or otherwise calculated in accordance with the above guidance for estimating 
uncertainty using analytical calculation of error propagation or Monte Carlo simulation (Section 
8.6.1). While these emission factors likely include some prediction error, availability of source 
data for estimating that error may be inconsistent. As such, the prediction error of emission 
factors is presumed to be zero for the purpose of calculating an uncertainty deduction. Project 
proponents must use the available emission factor that results in the most conservative 
reduction estimates when applied across both the baseline and project scenarios. 
Uncertainty of fossil fuel burning and liming default emission factors is expected to be lower 
than 10%30 and is conservatively excluded from calculations. Uncertainty of biomass burning 
 
30 Refer to guidelines from Chapter 3, Vol. 1 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, 
available at: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/pdf/1_Volume1/V1_3_Ch3_Uncertainties.pdf 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
44
default emission factors may be higher than 10%, but the relative contribution to total 
uncertainty is expected to be small and it is therefore excluded from calculations.  
8.6.4 Uncertainty Deductions 
Uncertainty deductions are estimated and applied separately for each source of reductions 
within the project boundary. This deduction is estimated using a probability of exceedance 
method as follows (see Section 2.4 of the VCS Methodology Requirements, v4.4): 
𝑈𝑁𝐶∆•
̅̅̅,𝑡=
(
 
 √𝑠∆•
̅̅̅,𝑡
2
∆•
̅̅̅̅𝑡
 ×  100
)
  × 𝑡0.667 
(38) 
Where: 
𝑈𝑁𝐶∆•
̅̅̅,𝑡 
= Uncertainty deduction for gas • to be applied in verification period t (%) 
∆•
̅̅̅̅𝑡 
= Mean estimated reduction in gas • across the entire project area in year t 
(t CO2e/ha) 
tα=0.667 
= Critical value of a one-sided student’s t-distribution at significance level 
α = 0.667 (66.7%) with degrees of freedom appropriate to the sampling 
design used; equal to approximately 0.4307 at large sample sizes 
(dimensionless) 
This uncertainty deduction is based on a defined threshold in the estimated probability density 
function of the reduction for a given source. This enables a judgment of the extent to which the 
achieved reduction by the project may be expected to be accurate. By this procedure, estimate 
what proportion of the estimates of ∆•
̅̅̅̅𝑡 would have a 66.7% probability of exceeding the true 
value of ∆•
̅̅̅̅𝑡. That proportion is then used as a percentage uncertainty deduction. Where it is 
unlikely that the half-width of the two-sided 90% percent confidence interval for estimating 
reductions could exceed 10% of the estimated value, random uncertainty may be excluded. 
Where the half-width of the two-sided 90% confidence interval exceeds 100% of the reduction 
estimate, the project is not eligible for crediting. Figure 2 demonstrates this concept. 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
45 
Figure 2. Probability of exceedance. The value for ∆•
̅̅̅̅𝒕 used in calculation of net 
reductions is determined by applying an uncertainty deduction based on the 33.3rd 
percentile of the estimated probability distribution of ∆·
̅̅̅̅𝒕  
 
 
 
 
 
VM0051, v1.0 
 
 
46