8 
QUANTIFICATION OF GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
8.1.1 
Baseline Management Activities 
The project proponent must document the management activities that occurred during the 
baseline period, in order to quantify baseline emissions and/or removals. Management activities 
must include: 
1) The number of livestock grazing animals of different categories (eg, weight, sex, age and 
species) in one or more areas within or in the entire project area. 
2) The average forage removal, or grazing intensity (%) by all animals, as measured by 
comparison of forage biomass inside and outside fenced exclosures[2, 17], or inside and 
outside unfenced areas otherwise avoided by livestock, such as conservation areas, with 
similar soil and climate, or before and after planned grazing events. Estimates of grazing 
intensity over large areas may be made by using satellite-based indices, such as NDVI[12, 
13] , as long as such indices are correlated with ground measurements with a R2 > 0.35. 
3) The pattern of time and timing of animal use of the project area. 
4) Prescribed burns at some desired frequency. 
Management activities may also be considered to mean a lack of management in the form of 
unplanned livestock grazing, lack of grazing, or unplanned fires. The project proponent must also 
provide evidence of the baseline vegetation conditions and their association with management 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 19 
activities in the project area during the baseline period. Such evidence must take the form of any 
one or combination of the following, in no particular order of preference:  
5) Field data on vegetation composition (biomass, percent cover, incidence). Dominant 
vegetation types that are associated with lower soil carbon (eg, annual plants)  or with 
grasses with high lignin and cellulose content such as various Pennisetum spp. (in 
Africa), Spinifex spp., (Australia), switchgrass Panicum virgatum or Johnson grass 
Sorghum halepense (North America), or Paspalum spp. (South America)) following 
consumption by livestock. These data may be presented as visually estimated percent 
cover of different vegetation types and average percent cover of annual and perennial 
grasses, bare ground and shrubs, must be provided if applicable. 
6) Measurements of grazing intensity from exclosure (fence) experiments, visual estimates 
calibrated from exclosure experiments or ungrazed areas within the project area with 
similar soils and rainfall to areas where soil carbon is expected to be increased. 
7) GPS-referenced, dated photographs of a representative sample of the project area, with 
sufficient evidence to judge a shift to project scenario vegetation from similar 
photographs taken of the same view at the same GPS point. 
8) Interpreted satellite images, such as indices of NDVI[12, 13] or maps of burned areas[18, 19] 
across multiple years, coupled with ground vegetation data to support the conclusion that 
these images are correctly interpreted with reasonable accuracy (ie, R2 > 0.35 between 
index and vegetation measure from 1). 
8.1.2 
Design and Establishment of Permanent Sampling Stations 
This methodology depends greatly on the success at measuring changes in SOC, the results of 
project activities, and/or key inputs into soil carbon models such as grazing intensity and/or the 
intensity and frequency of fires. Because these measurements in grasslands often vary by a large 
amount over distances of a few meters, the project proponent must establish permanent sampling 
stations, marked with permanent materials, like PVC, metal or stone, with recorded GPS 
locations to 10 meter accuracy, or close enough to find the permanent markers of the station. 
Measurements of carbon stocks in soil and wood (if relevant) at the same place may then be 
compared over time and control for initial differences in SOC, grazing and fire history, vegetation, 
topography, and other factors. Project impacts on carbon stocks are therefore best detected by 
measuring the change in carbon stocks between years at each sampling station and then 
summed over all sampling stations rather than the difference between mean stocks across all 
sampling stations in different years. This sampling approach will greatly reduce the variance, and 
therefore, uncertainty, in changes in stocks between baseline and project activities.  Further 
details about measurements at these permanent stations are discussed in Section 0. 
8.1.2.1 Number of Sampling Stations 
The total number of sampling stations, n, for the project area must be determined by using the 
CDM A/R methodological tool Calculation of the number of sample plots for measurements within 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 20 
A/R CDM project activities.[20] As soil is typically sampled from three or more pooled 5-10 cm 
diameter cores at a station and therefore from a small total area (< 0.05 m2), there are potentially 
a large number of potential sampling sites in even the smallest project area (< 1 km2). 
Consequently, the total number of sampling stations, according to the CDM tool, is largely 
insensitive to the total area of the project for a measured approach as shown in see Figure . 
Figure 1: Estimate Number of Sampling Stations  
 
Figure 1 shows the estimated number of sampling stations needed to detect an increase in mean 
SOC of 0.3 percent for samples with a typically observed standard deviation of 0.3 percent (100 
percent of mean) and target standard error of less than 10 percent. 
8.1.2.2 Stratification 
Measured Approach 
Obtaining precise estimates of soil organic carbon requires careful stratification[21, 22]. Stratification 
on the basis of vegetation and management practices must provide a good initial scope of 
stratification for soil, but additional factors, such as topography (top, middle and bottom of 
slopes), and texture (proportion of sand, silt and clay) may also be important for defining strata. A 
cluster, regression tree or other similar analysis of SOC from the permanent sampling stations, 
which is required to establish baseline SOC stocks, must be used to decide a final stratification. 
These types of analyses examine a set of different measurements from different locations to find 
groups of locations with similar values, and may be conducted in many ways depending on the 
extent of variability in soils, climate, and management in a project area[22]. For a detailed 
discussion and recommended approaches, see references [23, 24]. 
Rather than limit uncertainty in absolute measurement of SOC stocks, a modeled approach has 
the goal to reduce the 95 percent confidence interval of a regression line of predicted change in 
SOC relative to observed change in SOC. This imposes an additional emphasis for the 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
Number¬†of¬†Stations
Project¬†Area¬†(km2 )
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 21 
distribution of sampling stations to include the largest possible variation in SOC, both in terms of 
the strata chosen and in sampling variation within strata.  
Using cluster analysis, regression tree analysis or any other means, such as the latest version of 
the VCS module VMD0016 Methods for stratification of the project area (X-STR), v1.0 [25], the 
project proponent must classify the area by past management practices and preliminary 
information about soils (such as from a soils map) and climatic conditions (such as from areas 
that are similar in aboveground productivity, or from rainfall maps). This step is equivalent to 
stratification in an afforestation / reforestation project[20] but focused on factors related to soil 
carbon sequestration[7], fire frequency, and animal distribution and management, and reduces the 
uncertainty in estimates of project removals of GHG. This will produce s strata within which 
baseline and project emissions are calculated, soil carbon changes and methane emissions will 
be monitored, and past (baseline) and proposed project management activities have been (are) 
implemented.  
As an example, a project might be subdivided into five areas of different soil type and/or 
precipitation as seen in Figure . The sampling design would then feature eight strata, one for 
each combination of management activity, soil type, and precipitation or water availability. 
Figure 2: Hypothetical Landscape among Eight Strata Subject to Different Management 
Practices  
 
Once each stratum is defined and mapped and the total number of sampling stations determined, 
then a representative number of sample points, zm, are chosen within each stratum. The number 
of points per stratum will depend on which stratified sampling method is used. Where SOC 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 22 
exhibits similar variability among strata (ie, coefficients of variation (standard deviation/mean) 
differ by less than 40% in areas with different soil, vegetation, or management practices), the 
number of stations per stratum must be proportional to the proportional area of each stratum in 
the project area. This is the most likely scenario under the expectation that strata for a project are 
selected to ensure a low variance (10 percent standard error) within each stratum. For example, 
in a project with three strata, A, B, and C that represent 50 percent, 40 percent and 10 percent 
respectively of the total project area and the project area requires 100 sampling stations, then 50, 
40, and 10 stations must be placed randomly within each of strata A, B, and C  as shown in 
Error! Reference source not found.3 below. This is the case of proportional allocation, which 
the number of stations is allocated to each stratum on the basis of its proportion of the total 
project area. 
Figure 3: Proportional Allocation of Sampling Stations (Stars) Among the Eight Strata in 
the Hypothetical Project Area in Figure 2 
 
 
Alternatively, the best possible stratification of the project area, resulting in the least uncertainty, 
may still feature certain strata that exhibit much higher variability (> 40% difference in coefficient 
of variation) in SOC than others. In this case, ‚Äúoptimum‚Äù or disproportionate allocation of stations 
may be most appropriate. Where a disproportionate application is applied, strata receive a 
number of sampling stations proportional to their coefficient of variation rather than their 
proportional area. In the example, hypothetical strata A, B, C might receive 20, 20, and 60 
percent of stations, respectively if SOC in stratum C is three times more variable (three times 
higher coefficient of variation), regardless of their proportional areas. As an example, Figure 4 
shows the disproportionate allocation of 25 sampling stations in the hypothetical project area 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 23 
shown below. In this case the high precipitation stratum and the clay soils with a high water table 
are three times more variable than other strata, and thus receive 6 stations, as opposed to two. 
 
Figure 4: Optimal or Disproportional Allocation of Sampling Stations (Stars) Among the 
Eight Strata of the Hypothetical Project Area in Figure  
 
 
The primary goal of the distribution of stations must be to reduce variability and increase 
representation of different SOC values in the project area. 
Modeled Approach 
For projects using a modeled approach, the objective is to demonstrate that the chosen soil 
carbon model can predict SOC stocks or changes in SOC stocks at each of a large number of 
sampling stations that differ in key factors, such as climate soil type, past management, and 
vegetation. Sampling stations must be selected to encompass as much of the variability in these 
factors as possible in order to test that the model is appropriate for use in the project area (see 
Section 8.1.3.3. The sample size must be determined using an online calculator8 or a power 
analysis in any standard statistics program. As an example, to achieve the desired model 
accuracy of R2 > 0.80 (see Section 8.1.3.3) and an uncertainty of less than 0.08, a total of 120 
samples would be needed from across the full variation in SOC within the project area. 
8.1.3 
Calculation of Baseline Emissions 
                                                
8 One resource for online calculators is http://www.danielsoper.com/statcalc3 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 24 
8.1.3.1 Baseline Emissions from Grazing Animals (BEM) 
Baseline methane emissions from grazing animals must be estimated from data on total numbers 
for different livestock categories that reflect species, age, sex and their respective weights, in the 
project area. The methodology applies to Tier 2 approaches, as outlined in the IPCC 2006 
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Chapter 10, Emissions From Livestock and 
Dung Management[5] but with local input data. Calculations are based on estimating daily 
methane emissions as a function of the body weight (kg) of each major animal category [26] 
(Figure 5: Daily Methane Emissions Data), and then multiplied by the number of animals in each 
animal category and 365 days in a year. Emissions from all categories may then be summed to 
provide the total annual methane emissions for the project area. Domestic livestock grazing 
animals of category c must be classified as one of three animal types: ruminants (sheep, goats, 
cattle, buffalo, and camelids (ie, camels, alpacas, guanacos, llamas), equids (donkeys, horses) or 
pigs. 
İ§İßİØ‡µå ‡∑ç‡µ´İ§İ∞‡Æº‡µà İ¶İØİßİ®·à∫İπ‡Øñ·àª‡µØ
‡ØÑ
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µàİ©İπİ≤‡Æº‡ØÅ‡∞∞‡µà365 ‡µà6.26ıî10‡¨ø‡¨ª
(1) 
Where: 
BEM 
= Baseline annual emissions from grazing animals (tCO2e) 
BNc 
= Baseline number of animals of category c (head) 
DMEF(Wc) 
= Daily emission factor as a function of animal weight for category c (L CH4 / day) 
WC, 
= Average body weight during the baseline period for animals of category c (kg) 
GWPCH4 
= Global warming potential for methane (tCO2e / tCH4) 
c 
= category of grazing animals 
K 
= number of categories of grazing animals, eg species, gender, age 
combinations 
365 
= Conversion factor for days to years 
6.26 x 10-7 
= Conversion factor for L CH4 / day to t CH4 / day 
Further, DMEF(Wc) is the daily emission factor (liters CH4 / day) as a function of animal weight for 
animal category c. These values must be determined using the relevant allometric equations in 
Error! Reference source not found..  
Table 4: Allometric Equations, with Uncertainty, for Daily Methane Emissions for Three 
Animal Types: Ruminants, Equids, And Pigs  
Animal Type 
Equation 
n 
R2 
Uncertainty Percent 
Ruminants 
0.66 x WC0.97 
62
0.88
9.5%
Equids 
0.18 x WC0.97 
23
0.76
28.2%
Pigs 
0.07 x WC0.99 
12
0.93
18.6%
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 25 
BNc, is the harmonic mean number of animals of each category during the 10 years prior to the 
project start date, calculated as below. The harmonic mean conservatively weights lower values 
of methane emissions in a sample[27]. This must be calculated using equation (2). The harmonic 
mean BNc for n censuses[27] of Nc,i animals in each category c during census i is given by: 
İ§İ∞‡Øñ‡µå‡µ¨1
ıä‡µ∞‡µà‡µÆ
1
‚àë
1
İ∞‡Øñ,‡Øú
‡Ø°
‡Øú‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µ≤
(2) 
Where: 
BNc 
= Baseline number of animals of category c (head) 
n 
= Number of counts 
Nc,i 
= Animals in category c during count i (head) 
Calculations of uncertainty are given in Section 8.4.2.1.  
Figure 5 shows the daily methane emissions data compiled from the Franz et al. (2010) review of 
62 measurements for ruminants (sheep, goats, cattle and buffalo), 23 measurements for equids 
(donkeys and horses) and 12 measurements for pigs, showing how methane emissions scale 
with body weight W (kg). All animals were fed roughage forage similar in quality (40-50 percent 
neutral detergent fiber) to plants consumed in unfertilized grasslands that likely apply in this 
methodology. These relationships are summarized in Error! Reference source not found. 
above. 
Figure 5: Daily Methane Emissions Data 
 
Forage quality, and specifically the fiber content of forage, is known to affect methane 
emissions[28]. However, forage quality is not included because it introduces additional error into 
the calculation, since dry matter intake would also have to be estimated to yield methane 
emissions. Furthermore, the forage quality actually consumed, as opposed to that available, by 
free-living animals on grasslands can probably never be measured accurately across a large-
scale project. So instead, it is expected that the uncertainties in the allometric equations in Error! 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 26 
Reference source not found. are irreducible without impractical and prohibitively expensive 
direct methane measurements on individual animals[28] Depending on the relative abundance of 
equids in the composition of animals, this uncertainty in methane emissions may induce an 
uncertainty deduction in the calculation of removed methane emissions.  
8.1.3.2 Baseline Emissions of Methane from Burning of Biomass (BEBB) 
Biomass burning results in annual emissions of methane. These emissions may be 
conservatively excluded if project activities do not change or lead to decreased annual emissions, 
in which case BEBB = 0. If project activities decrease fire, proponents can choose to include 
biomass burning in baseline emission calculations and show the net decrease in such emissions 
under the project scenario. If project activities increase fire frequency, such as to remove shrubs 
and lead to a net increase in total carbon stocks from the increase in SOC associated with 
establishment of perennial grasses, project proponents must calculate the net change in 
emissions from biomass burning under the project scenario, BEBB, must be calculated with the 
following equation: 
İ§İßİ§İ§‡µå 
‚àë‡µ´İ®İ®İ¥İßİ≥‡Ø†,‡Øï‡µàİ£İ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øï‡µàİ≤İ£‡Ø†,‡Øï‡µØ
‡ØÜ
‡Ø†
‡µàİ§İ•‡ØÄ‡µàİßİ®‡Æª‡ØÄ‡µàİ©İπİ≤‡Æº‡ØÅ‡∞∞
1,000,000
(3) 
Where,  
BEBB 
= Baseline annual emissions of methane from burning of biomass (tCO2e) 
FFREQm,  
= Proportion of area of stratum m burned annually (percent) 
APBm,   
= Mean total aboveground biomass at the end of the growing season in stratum 
m (kg biomass/ha) 
PAm, 
= Baseline area in stratum m (ha) 
BCG 
= Baseline combustion factor for savanna/grassland (kg biomass burned/kg 
biomass)  
EFBG 
= Emission factor for the burning of grassland (g CH4/kg biomass burned) 
GWPCH4  
= Global warming potential of CH4 (tCO2e / tCH4) 
1,000,000 
= Converts g CH4 into Mg (tons) 
8.1.3.3 Baseline Changes in SOC Density 
The determination of a change in baseline equilibrium carbon density depends on the type of 
project approach used.  
Measured Approach. Where the measured approach is applied, initial SOCm,j,0 at each sampling 
station is the baseline. Initial SOCm,j,0 may be calculated from multiple pooled soil cores from 
each station as: 
İµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡¨¥‡µå İ¶İßİ≤İ∂İ™‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡¨¥‡µàİµİ±İ•%‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡¨¥‡µàİ§İ∑İÆİ≠‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡¨¥
(4) 
Where:  
 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 27 
SOCm,j,0 
= SOC density in station j in stratum m at time t =0 (tC/ha) 
DEPTHm,j,0  
= Depth of SOC sampling at the project start (cm) 
SOC%m,j,0  
= Percent SOC in dry soil from the entire soil profile to the chosen depth at 
station j in stratum m at time t =0 (percent) 
BULKm,j,0  
= Bulk density at station j in stratum m at time t =0 (Mg dry soil / m3) (Note Mg/m3 
are equivalent to g/cm3, the unit most commonly reported by laboratory 
analyses) 
Note that SOC%m,j,0 is a percent and allows the equation to correctly calculate SOC density 
(tons/ha). 
DEPTHm,j,0 must be selected by the project proponent to account for the vast majority (> 80 
percent) of SOC in the soil column, reflect depth to hardpans or bedrock, or to match calculations 
from soil carbon models. SOC%m,j,0 and BULKm,j,0  must be measured in a professional laboratory 
through either combustion methods[29] or multi-spectral diffraction with an infra-red spectrometer 
following project area-specific calibrations[30]. Bulk density accounts for whether soil is loosely or 
densely packed and must not include volume occupied by rock fragments or pebbles. 
Modeled approach. Baseline management activities and environmental conditions driven by 
possible project activities, such as grazing intensity and fire frequency, as well as critical factors 
affecting carbon inputs and outputs to soil, such as soil texture, climate and plant characteristics 
that affect decomposition must be imported into a peer-reviewed, published soil carbon dynamics 
model that has been assessed for accuracy at least once with an independent set of data other 
than that used to construct the model. For example, SNAP[3] CENTURY[4, 16, 31], EPIC[32, 33], Hurley 
Pasture[34, 35] models are four models that incorporate grazing and/or fire, among others, as 
factors determining soil carbon.  
One or more of these or other candidate models must be assessed for accuracy independently, 
(ie, with data other than that used to construct the model), and also tested to demonstrate it is 
appropriate for use in the project area by showing its ability to predict initial carbon stocks in 
different subareas (strata) within the project area (see below). This analysis assumes that past 
practices have been in place long enough for SOC to approach equilibrium. Thus the soil carbon 
model must be able to predict this equilibrium for strata in the project that have experienced 
similar management activities for 20 years or more. A regression line is fitted to a scatter-plot of 
model-predicted SOC (x-axis) vs. measured SOC from a large number permanent sampling 
stations[36] (see section 8.1.2.2). Variation in conditions and management activities across strata 
may be used as the source of different soil carbon model parameter inputs. The model must 
generate a coefficient of determination R2 > 0.80 across all strata. The slope of the regression 
line must have a 95 percent confidence interval that overlaps 1 and the 95 percent confidence 
interval of the intercept must overlap zero. If these criteria cannot be met with any available 
models, then the project proponents must use the measured approach. 
Bias must be determined by evaluating  the percent bias of a simulation (carbon model) relative 
to observed data[37].  
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 28 
İØİ§İ´İ£İµ‡µå ‚àë
·à∫İª‡Ø¢‡Øï‡Ø¶
‡Øú‡µÜİª‡Ø£‡Ø•‡Øò‡Øó
‡Øú·àª
‡Ø°
‡Øú‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‚àë
İª‡Ø¢‡Øï‡Ø¶‡Øú
‡Ø°
‡Øú‡≠Ä‡¨µ
(5) 
Where:  
MBIAS 
= Percent bias of carbon model predictions relative to observed data 
n  
= number of sampling stations tested 
Yobsi 
= observed SOC density at station i 
Ypredi 
= SOC density predicted at station i  
Bias of the model chosen for this methodology must be between -20% and +20%.The criteria of 
R2 > 0.80, slope = 1 and intercept = 0 should ensure that -20% < MBIAS < 20% [37]. In the case 
that significant bias is found and emission reductions are over-predicted‚Äî a subset of observed 
data may be used to adjust model parameters and fit the model to data, and then the model may 
be re-tested with the remaining data. 
In addition the 95 percent confidence interval for predicted mean SOC, derived from Monte Carlo 
simulations, must overlap with that of SOC measured at sampling stations in the same stratum. If, 
for certain strata, the 95 percent confidence intervals do not overlap, then the soil carbon model 
must be calibrated for that stratum by adjusting one or more parameters until 95 percent 
confidence intervals do overlap. 
Figure  provides an example test of predicted SOC (g/m2) of a soil carbon model with observed 
measured SOC, showing the regression line, coefficient of determination R2 and the degree of 
variation around the regression line expected for an accurate, precise model for calculating 
baseline SOC and changes in SOC. 
Figure 6: Example Test of Predicted SOC (G/M2) of a Soil Carbon Model with Observed 
Measured SOC 
 
y¬†=¬†1.0121x¬†‚Äê 203.84
R¬≤¬†=¬†0.9134
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Observed¬†¬†SOC¬†¬†(g/m2)
Predicted¬†SOC¬†(g/m2)
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 29 
The statistics of variation needed to calculate uncertainties for each parameter in the model are 
also necessary to determine an overall uncertainty in the model calculations of SOC. Total 
uncertainty of model predictions of baseline SOC, changes in SOC or eventual equilibrium SOC 
may be determined by an analysis called Monte Carlo simulation[3, 38]. In such a simulation, 
parameter values are randomly chosen from hypothetical normal distributions with mean equal to 
the parameter value and the measured standard error around that mean. Once all the different 
parameter values for the model are generated from the hypothetical distributions, a model 
prediction is made. This process is repeated 100 or more times to produce a mean model 
prediction with a 95 percent confidence interval. For baseline SOC, the Monte Carlo simulation 
would generate an expected value of SOC and a 95 percent confidence interval. 
In some cases, alternative soil carbon models, and/or the same modeling framework with 
different sets of input parameters, may be appropriate for the same project area and activity[39]. If 
so, the project proponent must match predictions of different models to observed SOC and 
choose the model that best predicts current SOCm,j,0 at each station in stratum m with the lowest 
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) value, as per standard model selection procedures[40]  Different 
models may use different numbers of parameters, so AIC is a statistic that measures the amount 
of variation in observation that is not predicted by a model, corrected for the number of 
parameters K used in the model to make the prediction: 
İ£İ´İ•‡µåıä‡µàıàıä·âÜ‚àë
ıÅ‡Øú
‡¨∂
‡Ø°
‡Øú‡≠Ä‡¨µ
ıä
·âá‡µÖ2İ≠‡µÖ2İ≠‡µ¨
İ≠‡µÖ1
ıä‡µÜİ≠‡µÜ1‡µ∞
(6) 
Where:  
AIC 
= Akaike Information Criterion value 
n  
= Number of observations tested, and  
ei  
= Deviation of an observation from its model prediction  
K 
= Number of parameters used 
Note that models, such as CENTURY[4, 16, 31], with large numbers of parameters (> 80) require a 
large number of observations n > K to even generate AIC, and such models would have to 
generate vastly greater fits (higher R2, lower ‚àë
ıÅ‡Øú
‡¨∂
‡Ø°
‡Øú‡≠Ä‡¨µ
 ) to observations than much simpler models 
with fewer parameters, such as the Hurley Pasture model[2, 34, 35].  
The chosen model must be re-calibrated as soon as changes in SOC may be measured (typically 
5 or more years but up to a maximum of 10 years) since the project start date or most recent re-
calibration (calibration period). In this case, the model should be used to detect the change in soil 
carbon during the previous calibration period rather than to predict carbon stocks. Necessary 
model parameters must be measured as discussed previously in this section and predictions of 
change in soil carbon stocks must be compared against measured changes at each of the 
permanent sampling sites using the regression approaches outlined previously in this section. 
Again, the model should predict observed change in soil carbon with R2 > 0.80 and RMSR < 0.7. 
If the selected model fails to successfully predict soil carbon changes according to these criteria, 
then the project proponent may modify the model, or re-calibrate it. Re-calibration may occur by 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 30 
adjusting parameter inputs or coefficients in the model‚Äôs functions in a reasonable way (justified 
by peer-reviewed scientific literature) to achieve successful prediction of changes in SOC during 
the calibration period. 
8.1.3.4 Generating Baseline SOC with a Soil Carbon Model 
Projects applying a modeled approach, must apply the maximum SOC in the previous 10 years 
as the baseline SOC stocks. For most projects, this will not have been measured, so the soil 
carbon model of choice must be used to ‚Äúback cast,‚Äù that is estimate SOC that would have 
occurred during the baseline period. 
Figure 77 provides an example of back casting SOC change from current SOC, based on 
knowledge of past management activities and environmental conditions. The blue line is 
predicted SOC of previous years (x-axis). This example shows what baseline SOC would be 10 
years prior (5549 g/m2 at year 10) rather than current (5192 g/m2 at year 1), thus increasing 
conservatism in the estimate of baseline SOC. 
Figure 7: Example of Back-Casting SOC Change from Current SOC 
 
Maximum baseline MSOCm,j,0 for each station in each stratum must be estimated by back casting 
the chosen model (Figure 7: Example of Back-Casting SOC Change from Current SOC) with 
model input parameters associated with the soil type, plant species, climate and management 
activity of that stratum.  
Overall, the soil carbon model may be used to estimate a modeled baseline SOC density, 
MSOCm,j,0 = maximum SOC density (tons/ha) at sampling station j in stratum m during the 
baseline period. 
İØİµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡¨¥‡µå ıâİΩıî ·à∫İØİµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øï·àª 
(7) 
Where:  
MSOCm,j,0 
= Modeled SOC in station j in stratum m at time t =0 (tC / ha) 
5000
5200
5400
5600
5800
6000
‚Äê15
‚Äê10
‚Äê5
0
SOC¬†(g/m2)
Years¬†Prior¬†to¬†Project¬†Start
Maximum¬†SOC,¬†Used¬†as¬†Baseline
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 31 
MSOCm,j,b  
= Modeled SOC in station j in stratum m for year b during the baseline period (tC 
/ ha) 
8.1.3.5 Baseline Emission Removals from Existing Woody Perennials (BRWP) 
Under the applicability condition that baseline emissions derived from livelihood-driven human 
impacts on aboveground woody biomass must be negligible and project activities cannot 
significantly alter such livelihood-driven activities, it is likely that fire and grazing are the main 
drivers of change in aboveground woody vegetation. Where a reduction in fire frequency is a 
project activity, woody plant carbon stocks will increase as a consequence, and reversals of past 
and ongoing losses of woody plant biomass may be conservatively excluded (ie, BRWP = 0). 
If past grazing pressure has been high enough to reduce fuel loads, past fire frequency may have 
been very low and woody plants, particularly shrubs, may have become abundant. If so, activities 
to sequester carbon may entail an increase in fire frequency that will reduce aboveground woody 
biomass but lead to an increase in soil carbon sequestration sufficient to increase total carbon 
stocks[1].  If fire is employed to change vegetation, aboveground woody biomass, must be 
accounted for in calculating project emissions and removals. 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
Project emissions and removals depend on the principal set of project activities. Projects that 
reduce fire events need to account only for changes in methane emissions by grazing animals 
and changes in SOC. Projects that increase fire events to remove unpalatable woody plants‚Äî 
usually shrubs‚Äîin order to stimulate grass and root production can increase total carbon stocks. 
These projects must account for increased methane emission from biomass burning and 
emissions from decreased aboveground woody biomass carbon. 
8.2.1 
Project Methane Emissions from Grazing Animals (PEMt) 
If project activities will include reduction in livestock numbers, then accompanying removals from 
reduced methane emissions must be conservatively excluded from project removals. This avoids 
potential leakage from shifting of animals to adjacent grasslands or from market leakage whereby 
other producers increase livestock numbers to replace project livestock reductions and meet 
market demand. However, whether or not methane emissions from livestock are reduced, 
calculations must be based on project data from animal counts or censuses and emission factor 
data based on project area-applicable body weight of each category from the equations in Error! 
Reference source not found. and Equation (1) (Section 8.1.3.1).  
İ≤İßİØ‡Øß‡µå ‡∑ç·âÄİ≤İ∞‡Æº,‡Øß‡µà İ¶İØİßıÇ‡µ´İπ‡Æº,‡Øß‡µØ·âÅ
‡ØÑ
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µàİ©İπİ≤‡Æº‡ØÅ‡∞∞‡µà365 ‡µà6.26ıî10‡¨ø‡¨ª
(8) 
Where: 
PEMt  
= Project emissions of CH4 from grazing animals at year t (tCO2e) 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 32 
PNC,t  
= Number of animals of each category c in year t (head) 
DMEf(WC,t) 
= Daily emission factor as a function of animal weight for category c (L CH4 / day) 
WC,t 
= Average body weight during year t for animals of category c (kg) 
GWPCH4 
= Global warming potential for methane (tCO2e / tCH4) 
365 
= Conversion factor for days to years 
6.26 x 10-7 
= Conversion factor for L CH4 / day to tCH4 / day 
The parameters are similar to those used for calculating baseline methane emissions. The 
number of grazing animal must be measured, because new animal categories may result due to 
project activities (eg, there is a shift to using different breeds or species of livestock). 
8.2.2 
Project Emissions from Burning of Biomass (PEBBt) 
Where project activities reduce the frequency of fire, this emission may be conservatively 
excluded, in which case PEBBt = 0.  Where project activities increase fire frequency (eg, to 
remove shrubs) and lead to a net increase in total carbon stocks, the baseline emissions of 
methane due to burning of biomass, PEBBt, t CO2e, are calculated using the following equation: 
İ≤İßİ§İ§‡Øß‡µå 
‚àë
·âÜİ≤İ®İ®İ¥İßİ≥‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µà‡µ´‚àë
İ£İ≤İ§‡Øù,‡Ø†,‡Øß
‡Ø≠‡≥ò
‡Øù‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µØ
ıñ‡Ø†
‡µò
·âá‡µàİ≤İ£‡Ø†,‡Øß
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†
‡µàİ≤İ•‡ØÄ‡µàİßİ®‡Æª‡ØÄ‡µàİ©İπİ≤‡Æº‡ØÅ‡∞∞
1,000,000
 
(9) 
Where: 
PEBBt  
= Project emissions of CH4 due to biomass burning in stratum m in year t (tCO2e) 
PFFREQm,t  
= Proportion of area of stratum m burned in year t (percent) 
APBj,m,t   
= Aboveground plant biomass at sampling station j in stratum m in year t at the 
beginning of the dry/cold/ or burning season (kg biomass/ha) 
zm 
= Number of sampling stations in stratum m at time t 
PAm,t  
= Project area in stratum m at time t (ha) 
PCG 
= Project combustion factor for savanna/grassland (kg biomass burned / kg 
biomass  
EFBG 
= Emission factor for the burning of grassland (g CH4 / kg biomass burned) 
GWPCH4  
= Global warming potential of CH4 (t CO2e / t CH4) 
1,000,000 
= factor for converting g CH4 into tons 
The project combustion factor (PCG) may be estimated in two ways. The project proponent may 
apply the most applicable IPCC default value 9 or may measure the mean proportion of 
aboveground biomass after fire (APBm,j,f) at the sampling stations in the project area that burned 
compared with the pre-fire aboveground biomass (APBm,j,t) at each station j within each stratum 
m[42] : 
                                                
9 Table 2.6 in 41. IPCC, Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 2006. 4(Chapter 2). 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 33 
İ≤İ•‡ØÄ‡µå1 ‡µÜ 
‚àë
‡µ¨İ£İ≤İ§‡Øù,‡Ø†,‡Øô
İ£İ≤İ§‡Øù,‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µ∞
‡Æø
‡Øù‡≠Ä‡¨µ
İ®
 
(10) 
Where: 
PCG 
= Project combustion factor for savanna/grassland (kg biomass burned/kg 
biomass  
APBj,m,f 
= Aboveground plant biomass in stratum m in year t immediately following fire (kg 
biomass /ha) 
APBj,m,t 
= Aboveground plant biomass at station j  in stratum m in year t at the beginning 
of the dry/cold or burning season (kg biomass/ha) 
F 
= Number of sampling stations that burned  
8.2.3 
Project Changes in SOC Density 
The determination of change from baseline equilibrium SOC density depends on the type of 
project approach used. 
Measured Approach: 
Where the measured approach is applied, the project sequestration of SOC (in t CO2e/ha) is 
calculated using the following equation:  
İ≤İ¥İµ‡Øß‡µå44 12
‡µó
‡µà‡∑çİ≤İ£‡Ø†
ıñ‡Ø†
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µà‡∑çİµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øß‡µÜİµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Ø©
İª
‡Ø≠‡≥ò
‡Øù‡≠Ä‡¨µ
(11) 
Where:  
PRSt  
= Project removals due to changes in SOC stocks in year t (tCO2e) 
PAm 
= Project area of stratum m (ha) 
s  
= Number of strata in the project area  
zm  
= Number of sampling stations in stratum m 
SOCm,j,,v  
= Baseline SOC in station j in stratum m in year v, If this is the first monitoring 
period, v= 0, for subsequent monitoring periods, v represents the year of last 
verification (tC)  
SOCm,j,t  
= Project SOC measured at station j in stratum m in year t (tC/ha) 
Y  
= Length of the monitoring period (years) 
44/12  
= Conversion factor from tC to tCO2e 
İµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øß‡µå İ¶İßİ≤İ∂İ™‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øß‡µàİµİ±İ•%‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øß‡µàİ§İ∑İÆİ≠‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øß
(12) 
Where:  
SOCm,j,t  
= Project SOC measured at station j in stratum m in year t (tC/ha) 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 34 
DEPTHm,j,t  
= Soil core depth (cm) 
SOC%m,j,t  
= Percent soil carbon at time t (percent) 
BULKm,j,t  
= Bulk density at station j in stratum m in year t (Mg dry soil/m3; or equivalently, g 
dry soil/cm3) 
Note that this formula assumes that SOC in year Y and in year 0 (baseline or since last 
verification) will be measured at a large number (100-1000) of sampling stations j in a stratified 
project area, including zm stations in each stratum m (see Section 0).   
Modeled Approach: 
The selected project area-validated soil carbon model (see Section 8.1.3.3) must be used to 
simulate a projected equilibrium SOC density, called the project modeled SOC, PSOCeqm,j for 
sampling station in each stratum under expected project activities. Expected grazing intensities 
and/or fire frequencies under project activities will combine in the model with other parameters as 
needed for the chosen soil carbon model to generate PSOCeqm,j for each sampling station The 
input parameters for the soil carbon model must be chosen to such that conservative estimates of 
carbon removals are generated. Uncertainties for each parameter in the model must be available 
to determine an overall uncertainty for PSOCeqm,j with a Monte Carlo simulation[3, 43, 44], as 
discussed in detail in Section 8.1.3.3. The model must also calculate the number of years D to 
reach this equilibrium. 
Carbon typically accrues in response to management changes with decreasing increments over 
time as equilibrium is approached[4, 33, 35]. Thus conservatively, the annual increment in SOC is 
determined by the difference in SOC between the conservative baseline maximum from 10 years 
prior to the project start (MSOCm,j,0) and project modeled equilibrium (PSOCeqm,j,t) divided by the 
time necessary to achieve project equilibrium (D). The project equilibrium must be determined 
assuming that project activities will be implemented. Thus, multiplying the annual increment in 
SOC (tons/ha), by the conversion of C to CO2 44/12 yields CO2e at that station.  
İ≤İ¥İµ‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µå44 12
‡µó
‡µàİ≤İµİ±İ•‡Ø†
‡Øò‡Ø§‡µÜİØİµİ±İ•‡Ø†,‡¨¥
İ¶
(13) 
Where: 
PRSm,t 
= Annual project removals due to changes in SOC stocks in stratum m in year t 
(tCO2e /ha) 
PSOCeqm,  
= Project modeled equilibrium SOC at station j in stratum m (tC/ha) based on 
parameter values from zm sampling stations in stratum m 
MSOCm,0 
= Modeled SOC for stratum m at time t =0 (tC/ha) (see section 8.1.3.3) 
D 
= Years required to achieve equilibrium 
44/12  
= Conversion factor from tC to tCO2e 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 35 
İ≤İ¥İµ‡Øß‡µå‡∑ç·à∫İ≤İ£‡Ø†,‡Øß
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†
‡µàİ≤İ¥İµ‡Ø†,‡Øß·àª 
(14) 
Where: 
PRSt  
= Project removals due to changes in SOC stocks in year t (tCO2e) 
PAm,t 
= Project area of stratum m in year t (ha) 
s 
= Number of strata in the project area 
zm  
= Number of sampling stations in stratum m 
PRSm,j,t  
= Annual project removals due to changes in SOC stocks at station j in stratum m 
in year t (tCO2e / ha) 
8.2.4 
Project Emissions and Removals from Existing Woody Plants (PERWPt) 
Where project activities involve changes in fire management, the project proponent must monitor 
changes in aboveground woody plant biomass (AWPB) to quantify sequestration of GHG in 
aboveground woody plant carbon from reductions in fire or to ensure that losses of woody 
biomass from increased fire do not outweigh potential gains from soil carbon sequestration. 
Where the project activities do not involve changes in fire management, the project proponent 
may exclude the aboveground and belowground woody biomass pool by assuming PERWP = 0.    
İ≤İßİ¥İπİ≤‡Øß‡µå
44 12
‡µó
‡µàİ•‡µà‚àë
İ≤İ£‡Ø†,‡Øí
ıñ‡Ø†
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µà‚àë
İ£İπİ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡¨¥‡µÜİ£İπİ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øù,‡Øí
‡Ø≠‡≥ò
‡Øù‡≠Ä‡¨µ
1000 ‡µàİª
(15) 
Where: 
PERWPt  
= Project emissions from changes in aboveground woody biomass in year t 
(tCO2e) 
44/12  
= Conversion factor from C to CO2e 
C 
= Proportion of wood composed of carbon[45, 46] (kg C/kg biomass) 
PAm,Y  
= Project area of stratum m in year Y (ha) 
zm  
= Number of sampling stations in stratum m 
s  
= Number of strata in the project area 
AWPBm,j,0  
= Aboveground woody biomass at the project start date or beginning of the 
monitoring period at station j in stratum m; (kg biomass/ha) 
AWPBm,j,Y  
= Aboveground woody biomass at station j in stratum m in year Y (kg 
biomass/ha) 
Y 
= Length of the monitoring period (years) 
1000 
= Conversion factor from kg  to t 
8.3 
Leakage 
8.3.1 
Estimation of Leakage 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 36 
This methodology considers two forms of leakage: displacement leakage from the movement of 
livestock off the project area where they may reduce soil carbon, and market leakage, where 
reductions in livestock numbers as a project activity would create market incentives to replace the 
lost livestock.  
LEt =LDt +LMt  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(16) 
 
Where: 
LEt = total leakage emissions in year t (tCO2e) 
LDt = leakage emissions from displaced livestock in year t (tCO2e) 
LMt = emissions from market leakage in year t (tCO2e) 
8.3.1.1 Leakage Emissions From Displaced Livestock  
Increased GHG emissions from the displacement of livestock outside the project area is limited 
by the applicability condition that the project must be structured to keep livestock within the 
project area, and the project proponent must be able to enforce the boundaries of the project 
area. The project proponent must prevent incursion of livestock from outside the project area or 
excursion of livestock from inside the project area through fencing, patrolling by game scouts, or 
other such enforcement of project area boundaries.   
The project proponent is expected to control grazing animal numbers inside the project area and 
account for the number of animals involved and duration of any movement of livestock to outside 
the project area. Mechanisms must be in place to prevent incursion of livestock onto project lands 
and to monitor and prevent migration or transport of livestock out of project lands. Such 
mechanisms may include fencing of private lands, governance structures that penalize lack of 
cooperation and participation, education, and monitoring on communal grazing lands.  
Nevertheless, monitoring of project activities may reveal that livestock excursions outside the 
project area have occurred and any impacts of such excursions on GHG emissions or reductions 
outside the project area must be accounted for as leakage. Where the project area is not fenced, 
such as in pastoralist systems, the movement and excursion of livestock to more than two 
kilometers from the project area boundary is considered leakage.10 
Leakage methane emissions are deemed as zero because movement of project livestock off the 
project area does not result in a net increase in the number of livestock emitting methane. 
However, movement of livestock could result in losses of carbon from higher levels of overgrazing 
off the project area. Leakage may be accounted in two possible ways: monitored approach or 
penalty approach.  
                                                
10  
This distance allows for possible uncertainty of herders as to the position of herds in or out of the project 
area and is a typical allowable buffer between ethnic group communal grazing lands [48] 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 37 
A monitored approach allows livestock to graze on either planned (identified) or unplanned 
(unidentified) land parcels outside the project area, such land parcels must be classified as 
grassland, forest, or cropland. In this approach, potential vegetation impacts and baseline SOC in 
these outside areas must be measured/monitored, following VMD0040 Leakage from 
Displacement of Grazing Activities.  
The penalty approach is a more conservative option (leakage calculations will likely be larger) but 
no monitoring of soils and/or vegetation outside the project area is required and off-project area 
use of grasslands, croplands, and forests is not differentiated. In this case, displacement leakage 
(LDt) must be calculated as a proportion of net removals from increased soil carbon in year t 
(PRSt), based on the proportion of total project livestock-days in project year t, 365 x PNc,t, that 
occurred outside the project area.  
İÆİ¶‡Øß‡µå‚àë
‚àë
İ¶İ∞‡Øñ,‡Ø´
‡Øû
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡Øó
‡Ø´‡≠Ä‡¨µ
365 ‡µà‚àë
İ≤İ∞‡Øñ,‡Øß
‡Øû
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µàİ≤İ¥İµ‡Øß
(17) 
Where:  
LDt 
= Leakage emissions from displaced livestock (tCO2e) 
DNC,x 
= Number of livestock of each category c that were off the project area on day x 
(head) 
d 
= Total number of days livestock were off the project area 
k 
= Total number of livestock categories 
PNC,t 
= Number of animals of each category c in year t (head) 
PRSt  
= Project removals due to changes in SOC stocks in year t (tCO2e) 
Alternatively, where using the monitored approach to calculating leakage, the methods for 
accounting for losses of SOC in VCS module VMD0040 (in Sections 5.2.4 through 5.2.6) must be 
followed for unidentified grasslands, croplands, and forests. Because this approach explicitly 
estimates actual losses of SOC from livestock grazing, it is more accurate in its calculation of 
leakage, and requires the measurement of many additional parameters, as defined in the module. 
The project proponent, for example, whose livestock were displaced only onto additional 
grasslands, would be required to measure a number of parameters including, the area of parcels 
affected, aboveground net primary production, and the number of livestock using the area prior to 
livestock displacement and following displacement. The monitored approach to calculating 
displacement leakage does not need to account for CH4 or N2O emissions. Methane emissions 
from project livestock will not change even if livestock are displaced off the project area, and the 
applicability conditions limit any net increase in dung deposition. Other impacts, such as 
deforestation or degradation associated with livestock use of forests, or removal of crop residues 
by livestock must be included in leakage calculations using the monitored approach, if they 
cannot be shown to be negligible (ie, greater than 0.05 x PERt, equation 18) 
8.3.1.2 Market Leakage Emissions  
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 38 
These result from an increase in activity by other producers of a commodity outside the project 
area to compensate for the reduced supply of a commodity from within the project area, such as 
increased timber harvesting elsewhere in a country to compensate for reduced harvesting in a 
project area). Market leakage is generally considered to be minimal in ALM projects[47] because 
the projects still allow the same livelihood choices and production of grassland commodities (eg, 
livestock). The applicability condition that limits project size, and thus potential impact of the 
project on national and international markets, reduces the chance that project activities will result 
in declining supply of livestock. Nevertheless, market leakage for any reductions in livestock must 
be made by using the VCS module VMD0033 ‚ÄúEstimation of emissions from market leakage‚Äù11 to 
estimate LMt emissions from market leakage. 
Fire alterations are not expected to dramatically alter livelihood choices, (eg, would not prevent 
use of land for livestock, wildlife conservation, tourism). Projects that manage fire or otherwise do 
not reduce livestock need not account for market leakage. 
Total leakage is negligible where: 
İÆİß‡Øß‡µè0.05 ‡µàİ≤İ∞İ¥‡Øß 
(18) 
Where: 
LEt 
= Total leakage emissions (tCO2e) 
PNRt    
= Project emissions plus removals in year t (tCO2e) 
8.4 
Net GHG Emission Reduction and Removals 
The estimation of net project emission reductions, PERt, and net change in carbon stocks, 
NCCSt, each year of the monitoring period is calculated using the following equation: 
İ≤İßİ¥‡Øß‡µåİ≤İßİØ‡Øß‡µÖİ≤İßİ§İ§‡Øß‡µÜİ§İßİØ‡µÜİ§İßİ§İ§  
 
 
 
 
(19) 
Where: 
PERt    
= Net project emission reductions in year t (tCO2e) 
PEMt 
= Project methane emissions from livestock in year t (tCO2e) 
PEBBt 
= Project emissions from biomass burning in year t (tCO2e) 
BEM 
= Baseline methane emissions from livestock (tCO2e) 
BEBB 
= Baseline emissions from biomass burning (tCO2e) 
Note that if project methane emissions decrease relative to the baseline from removal of livestock 
from the project area (note, not from forage improvement), ie  PEMt ‚Äì BEM < 0, this GHG 
removal must be conservatively excluded to avoid market leakage, and proponents must set 
PEMt ‚Äì BEM = 0. 
                                                
11 http://www.v-c-s.org/sites/v-c-
s.org/files/VMD0033%20Estimation%20of%20Emission%20from%20Market%20Leakage%2C%20v1.0.pdf 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 39 
İ∞İ•İ•İµ‡Øß‡µåİ≤İ¥İµ‡Øß‡µáİ≤İßİ¥İπİ≤‡Øß 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(20) 
Where: 
NCCSt 
= Net change in carbon stocks in year t (tCO2e) 
PRSt 
= Project removals due to sequestration of soil carbon in year t (tCO2e) 
PERWPt 
= Project removals due to loss or gain of carbon stocks in woody biomass in year 
t (tCO2e) 
The net GHG benefit is calculated using the following equation: 
 
İ¥‡Øß‡µåİ≤İßİ¥‡Øß‡µÖİ∞İ•İ•İµ‡Øß‡µÜİÆİß‡Øß 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(21) 
Where: 
Rt 
= Net GHG emission reductions and removals in year t (tCO2e) 
PERt    
= Net project emission reductions in year t (tCO2e) 
NCCSt 
= Net change in carbon stocks in year t (tCO2e) 
LEt 
= Total leakage changes in soil carbon in year t (tCO2e) 
8.4.1 
Ex-Ante Calculations of Net Emissions and Removals 
The project must perform an ex-ante (before project) calculation of expected or estimated net 
emissions and removals. The key to making such a calculation is to define project quantitative 
management objectives for fire frequency and/or grazing management compared to baseline 
activities. The project proponent must do the following: 
1) Show a table of baseline and proposed project scenario management activities.  
2) Show a table of expected parameters and emissions and removals, and their 
uncertainties, associated with those management objectives; use data from the peer-
reviewed literature, measure activities in the project area, or calculate with a model the 
resulting changes in emissions and removals associated with the management. 
3) Calculate expected project scenario emissions and removals, and their uncertainties, 
based on these management targets. 
4) Show a table of baseline emissions, project emissions and removals, leakage (if any), 
and total net greenhouse gas emissions and removals for each year of the project 
crediting period. 
8.4.2 
Estimation of Uncertainty 
The VCS Standard[49] requires that uncertainty be calculated on the basis of the full width of the 
95 percent CI expressed as a percentage of the estimate of each emission or removal. IPCC 
Guidelines[43] recommend using a Tier 2 approach to determine uncertainty where emission 
reductions are determined by a combination of measurements, published emission factors, and 
process models, such as a soil carbon model. A Tier 2 approach involves conducting Monte Carlo 
simulations[3, 38], which must calculate Rt from equation (21) (see section 8.4) more than 100 
times, with each calculation drawing randomly from  hypothetical normal distributions of expected 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 40 
values of each parameter in the calculation, as defined by the mean and standard errors of each 
parameter. This simulation gives a mean and standard deviation of net emissions and removals 
Rt that are used to calculate uncertainty (equation (22)). Such Monte Carlo simulations may be 
done in online computing environments, such as the R Project for Statistical Computing[48], or 
even with macros developed for spreadsheets[44].  
İ∑İ∞İ¥‡Øß‡µå
‡¨∑.‡¨º‡¨∏‡µà‡¨µ‡¨¥‡¨¥‡µà‡Øå‡ÆΩ‡µ´‡ØÜ‡Æº‡Øã‡≥ü,‡≥ô‡µØ
‡ØÜ‡Æº‡Øã‡≥ü‡µà·à∫‡Ø°‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ
  
 
 
 
 
 
(22) 
Where: 
UNRt 
 = total uncertainty in net emission reductions and removals, not including leakage 
(%) 
n 
 
= number of Monte Carlo simulation runs performed (must be > 100) 
MCRt 
= mean net emissions reductions and removals at time t, from n Monte Carlo 
calculations of Rt, (tCO2e) 
SD(MCRt,n) 
= standard deviation of Rt from n Monte Carlo simulations 
Alternatively, total uncertainty may be calculated by weighting uncertainties according to the 
magnitude of emission or removal. In this case, uncertainty in net reductions and removals UNRt 
is driven by uncertainty in baseline emissions, project emissions and project net changes in 
carbon stocks. 
İ∑İ∞İ¥‡Øß‡µå·à∫·à∫UPE‡Øß x ·à∫PEM‡Øß ‡µÖ PEBB‡Øß·àª·àª‡¨∂   ‡µÖ ·à∫UNCCS‡Øß x NCCS‡Øß·àª‡¨∂‡µÖ·à∫UBE x ·à∫BEM ‡µÖ İ§İßİ§İ§·àª·àª‡¨∂·àª‡¨µ/‡¨∂
İ≤İßİØ‡Øß‡µÖİ≤İßİ§İ§‡Øß‡µÖİ∞İ•İ•İµ‡Øß‡µÖİ§İßİØ‡µÖİ§İßİ§İ§
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(23) 
Where: 
UNRt 
 = uncertainty in net emission reductions and removals, not including leakage, at 
time t (%) 
UPEt 
 
= uncertainty in project emissions at time t (%) 
UNCCSt 
= uncertainty in net change in carbon stocks at time t (%) 
UBE 
 
= uncertainty in baseline emissions (%) 
BEM 
 
= baseline animal methane emissions (tCO2e) 
PEMt 
 
= project animal methane emissions at time t (tCO2e) 
BEBB  
= baseline emissions from biomass burning (tCO2e) 
PEBBt  
= project emissions from biomass burning (tCO2e) 
NCCSt  
= net project changes in carbon stocks (tCO2e) 
Each of the three component uncertainties are derived in detail below 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 41 
8.4.2.1 Uncertainty in the Baseline 
For the calculation of baseline emissions and reductions, BER, uncertainty arises in the 
calculation of methane emissions only, because all other net emissions are conservatively 
assumed to be zero, unless increasing fire frequency is a proposed management activity.  
In this case: 
İ∑İ§İß‡µåİ∑İ§İßİØ 
(24) 
Where: 
UBE 
= Uncertainty in baseline emissions (%) 
UBEM 
= Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from grazing animals (go to section 
8.4.2.1.1) (%) 
In the case of proposed activities to increase fire frequency: 
İ∑İ§İß‡µå·à∫·à∫İ§İßİØ‡µàİ∑İ§İßİØ·àª‡¨∂‡µÖ‚àë
·à∫İ∑İ§İßİ§İ§‡Ø†‡µàİ§İßİ§İ§‡Ø†·àª‡¨∂
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
·àª‡¨µ/‡¨∂
İ§İßİØ‡µÖ‚àë
İ§İßİ§İ§‡Ø†
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
(25) 
Where: 
UBEBBm 
= Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from burning of biomass (%) 
BEM 
= baseline methane emissions from animals (tCO2e) 
BEBB 
= baseline emissions from burning of biomass (tCO2e) 
8.4.2.1.1 Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from grazing animals (UBEM) 
İ∑İ§İßİØ‡µå·à∫‚àë
·à∫İ§İßİØ‡Øñ‡µàİ∑İ§İßİØ‡Øñ·àª‡¨∂
‡Øû
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
·àª
‡¨µ
‡¨∂
‚àë
İ§İßİØ‡Øñ
‡Øû
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
(26) 
Where: 
UBEM 
= Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from grazing animals (%) 
UBEMc 
= Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from animals in category c (%) 
BEMc 
= Baseline emissions from animals in category c (tCO2e) 
UBEMc is the uncertainty in methane emissions from animals in category c, as dictated by 
whether the animals are ruminants, equids, or pigs (see Section 8.1.3.1),. UBEMc is calculated 
from the uncertainty, for each animal category, in the regression equations predicting per animal 
daily methane emission (DMEc) based on the mean body weight (UDMEc, Error! Reference 
source not found.) and the uncertainty in the harmonic mean of animal counts (UBNc) during the 
baseline period. 
To obtain UBNc , first find SEBNc, the standard error[50] of the harmonic mean BNc of the series‚Äô 
Nc,i of animals in category c in count i of n counts or censuses.  
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 42 
İµİßİ§İ∞‡Øñ‡µå·à∫İ§İ∞İø·àª‡¨∂‡µà
‡Øå‡ÆΩ‡µ¨‡∞≠
‡≤ø‡≥é,‡≥î‡µ∞
·à∫‡Ø°‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ  
 
 
 
 
 
(27) 
Where: 
SEBNc 
= Standard error of the harmonic mean of animal counts in category c 
SD(1/Nc,i) 
= Standard deviation of the inverses of the count I of animals in category c 
Nc,i 
= Animals in category c in census i (head) 
BNc 
= Harmonic mean number of animals in category c (head) during the baseline 
period (head) 
n 
= Number of censuses 
The 95 percent confidence interval-based uncertainty in the estimated number of animals in 
category c is: 
İ∑İ§İ∞‡Øñ‡µå3.84 ‡µà100 ‡µàİµİßİ§İ∞‡Øñ
İ§İ∞‡Øñ
(28) 
Where: 
UBNc 
= Uncertainty in the harmonic mean of animal counts (%) 
SEBNc 
= Standard error of the harmonic mean of animal counts 
BNc 
= Baseline number of animals of category c (head) 
3.84 
= Multiplier converts expression into a 95% confidence interval 
100 
= Multiplier converts expression into percent 
İ∑İ§İßİØ‡Øñ‡µå‡µ´İ∑İ§İ∞‡Øñ
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İ¶İØİß‡Øñ
‡¨∂‡µØ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂
(29) 
Where: 
UBEMc 
= Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from animals in category c (%) 
UBNc 
= Uncertainty in the baseline harmonic mean of animals of category c (%) 
UDMEc 
= Uncertainty in the regression for predicting daily methane emissions for 
animals of category c (%) 
8.4.2.1.2 Baseline methane emissions from burning of biomass (BEBB) 
In the case of project activities that increase fire frequency, uncertainty in BEBB (UBEBB) is 
driven by uncertainty in fire frequency (UFFREQm) in stratum m (or mean proportion of area 
burned), and uncertainty in mean within-stratum aboveground plant biomass at the end of the 
growing season, UAPBm. UFFREQm  arises from either the 95 percent confidence interval in 
annual variation in proportion of area burned over a period of 10 or more years prior to the start 
date or from uncertainty in the interpretation of satellite images in burned area mapping in stratum 
m resulting from mis-identification or classification errors of burned versus unburned areas[19].  
UFFREQm = 3.84 ‡µà
‡Øå‡ÆΩ‡µ´‡Æø‡Æø‡Øã‡Ææ‡Øä‡≥ò,‡≤≥‡≥ä‡µØ
‡Æø‡Æø‡Øã‡Ææ‡Øä‡≥ò‡µà·à∫‡Æª‡Øí‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ‡µà100  
 
 
(30) 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 43 
Where: 
UFFREQm 
 
= uncertainty (%) in fire frequency within stratum m  
SD(FFREQm,t) 
= standard deviation in fire frequency in stratum m over BY years in the 
baseline period. 
BY  
= number of years in baseline period for which burned area is measured 
FFREQm 
= mean proportion of area burned during the baseline period 
100 
= converts the expression into percent 
3.84 
= converts the numerator into a 95% confidence interval 
UAPBm arises from the 95 percent confidence interval among permanent sampling stations in 
clipped, dried, and weighed biomass.  
İ∑İ£İ≤İ§‡Ø†‡µå3.84 ‡µà100 ‡µà
‡Øå‡ÆΩ‡µ´‡Æ∫‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥•‡≥ò‡µØ
‡Æ∫‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥ò‡µà·à∫‡Ø≠‡≥ò‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ 
 
 
 
 
(31) 
Where: 
UAPBm  
 
= uncertainty in aboveground plant biomass within stratum m  
SD(APBzm) 
= standard deviation in aboveground plant biomass among zm permanent 
sampling stations in stratum m 
zm 
= number of sampling stations in stratum m 
APBm 
= mean aboveground plant biomass in stratum m (kg/m2) 
Therefore these two sources of uncertainty combine as 
İ∑İ§İßİ§İ§‡µå
‡µ¨‚àë
·âÄİ§İ£‡Ø†‡µà‡µ´İ∑İ®İ®İ¥İßİ≥‡Ø†
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İ£İ≤İ§‡Ø†
‡¨∂‡µØ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂·âÅ
‡¨∂
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†
‡µ∞
‡¨µ/‡¨∂
İ≤İ£
(32) 
Where: 
UBEBB 
 = Uncertainty in baseline methane emissions from burning of biomass 
UFFREQm 
 = Uncertainty in the fire frequency in stratum m 
UAPBm 
 = Uncertainty in mean within-stratum aboveground plant biomass at the end of 
the growing season in stratum m 
BAm 
 = Baseline area of stratum m (ha) 
PA 
 = size of the project area (ha) 
s 
 = number of strata 
8.4.2.2 Uncertainty under the project scenario 
Uncertainty under the project scenario using a weighted uncertainty approach is determined by 
uncertainty in project emissions or in carbon stocks, weighted by the magnitude of each, for each 
year of the monitoring period.  
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 44 
İ∑İ≤İß‡Øß‡µå
·âÄ·à∫İ≤İßİØ‡µàİ∑İ≤İßİØ·àª2 ‡µÖ‚àë
‡µ´İ≤İßİ§İ§ıâ,ıê‡µàİ∑İ≤İßİ§İ§ıâ,ıê‡µØ
2
ıè
ıâ‡µå1
·âÅ
1
2
İ≤İßİØ‡µÖ‚àë
İ≤İßİ§İ§ıâ,ıê
ıè
ıâ‡µå1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(33)  
Where: 
UPEt 
= Uncertainty in project emissions (%)  
UPEMt 
= Uncertainty in project methane emissions from grazing animals (%) 
UPEBBm,t 
= Uncertainty in project methane emissions from burning of biomass (%) 
PEM 
= project methane emissions by animals during the monitoring period (tCO2e) 
PEBBm,t 
= project emissions from biomass burning in stratum m at time t (tCO2e) 
 
İ∑İ∞İ•İ•İµ‡Øß‡µå
·âÄ‚àë
‡µ´İ≤İ¥İµ‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µàİ∑İ≤İ¥İµ‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µØ
‡¨∂
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µÖ‚àë
‡µ´İ≤İßİ¥İπİ≤‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µàİ∑İ≤İßİ¥İπİ≤‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µØ
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡¨∂·âÅ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂
‚àë
İ≤İ¥İµ
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µÖ‚àë
İ≤İßİ¥İπİ≤
‡Ø¶
‡Ø†‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡Ø†,‡Øß
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(34) 
UNCCSt 
= Uncertainty in net changes in carbon stocks (%) 
UPRSm,t 
= Uncertainty in project reductions from soil sequestration (%) 
UPERWPm,t 
= Uncertainty in project emissions or removals from woody plants (%) 
PRSm,t 
= Removals from changes in soil carbon stocks in stratum m  at time t (tCO2e) 
PERWPm,t 
= Removals from changes in woody plant carbon stocks in stratum m at time t 
(tCO2e) 
8.4.2.2.1 Uncertainty in Project Methane Emissions 
İ∑İ≤İßİØ‡µå·à∫‚àë
·à∫İ≤İßİØ‡Øñ‡µàİ∑İ≤İßİØ‡Øñ·àª‡¨∂
‡Øû
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
·àª‡¨µ/‡¨∂
‚àë
İ≤İßİØ‡Øñ
‡Øû
‡Øñ‡≠Ä‡¨µ
(35) 
Where: 
UPEM 
= Uncertainty in project methane emissions from grazing animals during the 
monitoring period (%) 
UPEMc, 
= Uncertainty in project methane emissions from animals in category c (%) 
PEMc 
= project methane emissions from animals in category c (tCO2e) 
UPEMc, is the uncertainty in methane emissions calculated from the uncertainty, for each animal 
category, in the regression equations for per animal daily methane production (Error! Reference 
source not found.) and the uncertainty in the arithmetic mean of animal censuses for category c, 
PNc, during the monitoring period.  
İ∑İ≤İßİØ‡Øñ, ‡µå‡µ´İ∑İ≤İ∞‡Øñ
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İ¶İØİß‡Øñ
‡¨∂‡µØ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂
(36) 
Where: 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 45 
UPNc 
= Uncertainty in the project mean of animals of category c 
 
UPNc‡µå3.84‡µà100‡µà
SD·à∫PNc,Y·àª
PNc‡µà·à∫Y‚Äê1·àª1/2  
 
 
 
 
 
(37) 
Where: 
SD(PNc,Y)  
= Standard deviation of animal counts in category c across Y years of the 
monitoring period 
PNc  
= Arithmetic mean of animal numbers in category c (head) 
Y 
= Years in the monitoring period 
3.84  
= Multiplier that converts the numerator into a 95% confidence interval 
100  
= Multiplier that converts the expression into percent 
UPMEc 
= Uncertainty in the regression, taken from the literature (Table 4) for predicting 
daily methane emissions for animals of category c 
8.4.2.2.2 Uncertainty in Project Emissions From Burning Of Biomass 
In the case of project activities that increase fire frequency, uncertainty in PEBB, or UPEBB, is 
driven by uncertainty in fire frequency (UFFREQm) in stratum m (or mean proportion of area 
burned), and uncertainty in mean within-stratum aboveground plant biomass at the end of the 
growing season, UAPBm. UFFREQm  arises from either the 95 percent confidence interval in 
annual variation in proportion of area burned over the period since last validation or from 
uncertainty in the interpretation of satellite images in burned area mapping in stratum m resulting 
from misidentification or classification errors of burned versus unburned areas[19]. UAPBm arises 
from the 95 percent confidence interval among permanent sampling stations in clipped, dried, and 
weighed biomass. Consequently: 
İ∑İ≤İßİ§İ§‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µå‡µ´İ∑İ≤İ®İ®İ¥İßİ≥‡Ø†,‡Øß
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İ£İ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øß
‡¨∂‡µØ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂
(38) 
Where: 
UPEBB 
 = Uncertainty in project methane emissions from burning of biomass (%) 
 
UPFFREQm=3.84√ó100√ó
SD(PFFREQm,Y)
‡Øâ‡Æø‡Æø‡Øã‡Ææ‡Øä‡≥ò √ó·à∫Y-1·àª1/2  
 
 
 
 
(39) 
Where: 
UPFFREQm 
 
= Uncertainty in the project fire frequency in stratum m (%) 
PFFREQm  
 
= Mean proportion of area of stratum m burned during the Y years of the 
monitoring period  
SD(PFFREQm,Y)  
= Standard deviation in project area of stratum m burned during the Y 
years of the monitoring period 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 46 
UAPBm=3.84√ó100√ó
SD(APBm,Y)
‡Æ∫‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥ò √ó·à∫Y-1·àª1/2  
 
 
 
 
 
(40) 
Where: 
UAPBm 
= Uncertainty in mean within-stratum aboveground plant biomass at the end of 
the growing season in stratum m (%) 
APBm  
= mean aboveground plant biomass at the end of the growing season (kg/m2) 
Y 
= number of years in the monitoring period 
3.84  
= multiplier that converts the numerator into a 95% confidence interval 
100  
= multiplier that converts the expression into percent  
8.4.2.2.3 Uncertainty In Project Soil Removals 
Under a measured approach, uncertainty in soil sequestration, UPRSm,t in stratum m in year t is 
obtained from the 95 percent confidence interval, as required by the VCS rules[47, 49] of measured 
change in SOC across zm sampling stations in stratum m. 
UPRSm,t = 
‡Øå‡ÆΩ‚àÜ‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº‡≥ò‡µà‡¨µ‡¨¥‡¨¥‡µà‡¨∑.‡¨º‡¨∏
‚àÜ‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº‡≥ò‡µà·à∫‡Ø≠‡≥ò‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ 
 
 
 
 
 
(41) 
Where: 
UPRSm,t 
= uncertainty in project soil removals in stratum m at time t (%) 
ÔÅÑSOCm =   ‚àë
‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº‡≥ò,‡≥ï,‡≥ü‡¨ø ‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº‡≥ò,‡≥ï,‡≥°
‡Øí
‡Ø≠‡≥ò
‡Øù‡≠Ä‡¨µ
  
 
 
 
 
(42) 
Where: 
ÔÅÑSOCm 
= Mean of the difference in SOC between the beginning of the project or 
monitoring period, time v, and the year of monitoring t, across zm  sampling 
stations in stratum m (tC/ha) 
SDÔÅÑSOCm  = 
‡Øå‡ÆΩ‡µ´‚àÜ‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº‡≥ò,‡≥•‡≥ò‡µØ
·à∫‡Ø≠‡≥ò‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ  
 
 
 
 
 
(43) 
Where: 
SDÔÅÑSOCm 
= Standard deviation of ÔÅÑSOC in stratum m during the monitoring period across 
zm sampling stations in stratum m 
Y 
= Number of years in the monitoring period 
zm 
= Number of sampling stations in stratum m 
3.84  
= Multiplier that converts the numerator into a 95% confidence interval 
100 
= Multiplier that converts the expression into percent 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 47 
Under a modeled approach, UPRSm,t is obtained from the calculated 95 percent confidence 
interval, as required by the VCS[47, 49]  from a Monte Carlo simulation of modeled changes in soil 
carbon (see Sections 8.4.2 and 8.1.3.3) averaged across n model runs in stratum m. 
UPRSm,t  
= 3.84 x 100 x 
‡Øå‡ÆΩ‡ØÜ‡Øà‡ÆΩ‚àÜ‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº
‡ØÜ‡Øà‡ÆΩ‚àÜ‡Øå‡Øà‡Æº‡µà·à∫‡Ø°‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ 
 
 
 
(44) 
Where: 
UPRSm,t 
= Uncertainty in project removals through increased soil carbon in stratum m at 
time t (%) 
SDMODÔÅÑSOCm = Standard deviation of more than 100 modeled SOC estimates for stratum m 
from Monte Carlo simulation. 
MODÔÅÑSOCm 
= Mean modeled project equilibrium SOC for stratum m from more than 100 
simulations of project equilibrium SOC, (tC/ha) 
n 
= Number of times simulation is run (must be greater than 100) 
3.84 
= Multiplier to convert standard error into a 95% confidence interval 
100 
= Multiplier to convert to percent 
8.4.2.2.4 Uncertainty In Project Emissions And Removals From Woody Plant Biomass 
Uncertainty in emissions from loss or gain of aboveground woody plants UPERWPm,t arises from 
three sources: Consequently, uncertainty in removals or emissions from changes in aboveground 
woody plant biomass, UPERWPm,t, must be calculated as follows: 
İ∑İ≤İßİ¥İπİ≤‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µå‡µ´İ∑İ£İπİ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øß‡¨ø‡¨µ
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İ£İπİ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øß
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İπİ¶‡Ø†
‡¨∂‡µØ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂  
 
(45) 
Where: 
UPERWPm,t 
 
= Uncertainty in project emissions and removals from woody plants in 
stratum m in year t 
UAWPBm,t-1 
= Uncertainty in project emissions and removals from woody plant 
biomass in stratum m at the project start date or the previous (year = t-1) 
UAWPBm,t 
= Uncertainty in project emissions and removals from woody plant 
biomass in stratum m in year t-1 
UWDm 
 
= Uncertainty in wood density in stratum m 
(1) Among plot variation in initial (baseline) aboveground woody plant biomass in stratum m, 
UAWPBm,0  
İ∑İ£İπİ≤İ§‡Ø†.‡¨¥‡µå
‡Øå‡ÆΩ·à∫‡Æ∫‡Øê‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥ò.‡≥•‡≥ò·àª‡µà‡¨µ‡¨¥‡¨¥‡µà‡¨∑.‡¨º‡¨∏
‡Æ∫‡Øê‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥ò‡µà·à∫‡Ø≠‡≥ò‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ
 
 
 
 
 
(46) 
Where: 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 48 
SD(AWPBm,zm)  
= Standard deviation of aboveground woody plant biomass across zm 
sampling stations in stratum m. 
AWPBm  
= Mean woody plant biomass across zm sampling stations in stratum m 
(kg/m2) 
3.84 
 
 
= Multiplier to convert expression to 95% confidence interval 
100 
 
 
= Multiplier to convert expression to percent 
(2) 
Among plot variation in initial (baseline) aboveground woody plant biomass in year t of 
verification in stratum m: UAWPBm,t,  
İ∑İ£İπİ≤İ§‡Ø†,‡Øß‡µå
‡Øå‡ÆΩ·à∫‡Æ∫‡Øê‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥ò,‡≥ü,.‡≥•‡≥ò·àª‡µà‡¨µ‡¨¥‡¨¥‡µà‡¨∑.‡¨º‡¨∏
‡Æ∫‡Øê‡Øâ‡Æª‡≥ò,‡≥ü‡µà·à∫‡Ø≠‡≥ò‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ
 
 
 
 
 
 
(47) 
SD(AWPBm,t,zm) = standard deviation of aboveground woody plant biomass across zm sampling 
stations in stratum m at time t since the project start or last verification. 
AWPBm,t  
= mean woody plant biomass across zm sampling stations in stratum m at time t 
since the project start or last verification (kg/m2). 
3.84 
= multiplier to convert numerator to 95% confidence interval 
100 
 
=multiplier to convert expression to percent  
and 
(3) 
Among plot variation in wood density: UWDm 
İ∑İπİ¶‡Ø†‡µå
‡Øå‡ÆΩ·à∫‡Øê‡ÆΩ‡≥ò.‡≥•‡≥ò·àª‡µà‡¨µ‡¨¥‡¨¥‡µà‡¨∑.‡¨º‡¨∏
‡Øê‡ÆΩ‡≥ò‡µà·à∫‡Ø≠‡≥ò‡¨ø‡¨µ·àª‡∞≠/‡∞Æ
  
 
 
 
 
(48) 
Where: 
SD(WDm,zm) = standard deviation of wood density across zm sampling stations in stratum m at 
time t since the project start or last verification. 
WDm,  = mean wood density across zm sampling stations in stratum m (g/cm3) 
3.84 
= multiplier to convert expression to 95% confidence interval 
100 = multiplier to convert expression to percent 
 
8.4.2.2.5 Uncertainty in Leakage Emissions and Removals 
If leakage is not negligible, uncertainty in leakage must be calculated as 
İ∑İÆİß‡Øß‡µå‡µ´İ∑İÆİ¶‡Øß
‡¨∂‡µÖİ∑İÆİØ‡Øß
‡¨∂‡µØ
‡¨µ/‡¨∂  
 
 
 
 
 
(49) 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 49 
Where 
ULEt = uncertainty in total leakage (%) 
ULDt = uncertainty in displacement leakage (%) 
ULMt = uncertainty in market leakage (%) 
ULDt = UPRSt 
(50) 
Where: 
 
UPRSt  
= Uncertainty in project removals due to changes in soil carbon stocks in year t  
(%).  
This assumes that displacement leakage affects only soil carbon removals, and thus is subject to 
uncertainty associated with predicting impacts project activities on soil carbon removals 
Uncertainty in market leakage, ULMt, will be determined by using VCS module VMD0033 
‚ÄúEstimating emissions from market leakage.‚Äù 
8.4.2.3 Total Project Uncertainty 
The total project uncertainty UTt is calculated at the time of reporting through propagating the 
uncertainty in the baseline emissions and that in the project emissions and removals to year t: 
Under a Monte Carlo calculation 
UTt = (UNRt2 + ULEt2)1/2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(51) 
Where 
UTt  
= total project uncertainty (%) 
UNRt 
= uncertainty in net emissions and removals as calculated with Monte Carlo simulation 
(%)  
ULEt 
= uncertainty in leakage emissions and removals (%) 
İ∑İ∂‡Øß‡µå
·à∫·à∫İ∞İ¥‡Øß‡µàİ∑İ∞İ¥‡Øß·àª‡¨∂‡µÖ·à∫İÆİß‡Øß‡µàİ∑İÆİß‡Øß·àª‡¨∂·àª‡¨µ/‡¨∂
İ∞İ¥‡Øß‡µÖİÆİß‡Øß
(52) 
Where: 
UTt 
= Total project uncertainty (%) 
UNRt 
= Uncertainty in net emissions and removals, not including leakage (%) 
ULEt 
= Uncertainty in leakage emissions and losses from soil carbon stocks at time t 
(%) 
NRt 
= Net emissions reductions and removals at time t, not including leakage (tCO2e) 
LEt 
= Leakage emissions and losses from soil carbon stocks at time t (tCO2e) 
8.4.3 
Conservative Approach 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 50 
Calculations of emissions reductions and removals are conservative because: 
1) Baseline methane emissions use the harmonic mean for baseline emissions and an 
arithmetic mean for the project scenario leading to a conservative estimate for reductions 
in methane emissions (Section 8.1.3.1). 
2) Initial baseline SOC level for modelled (activity-based) emission reductions must be the 
maximum of the previous 10 years, as required by the VCS rules[47, 49] . In the case of 
modeled approach, the baseline equilibrium SOC is set to this maximum and then 
compared to the modeled future equilibrium SOC (Section 8.1.3.3). 
3) Because models used in the modeled approach must be validated for the project with 
data from the project area, no model correction is necessary. However, model predictions 
must meet the requirements for R2, slope and intercept in a regression versus observed 
values (see section 8.1.3.3) to assure that the model does not overestimate removals. All 
parameter choices are to be conservative. 
4) Emissions reductions are subject to reductions for uncertainty, as required by the VCS 
rules[47, 49] in the modeled approach, with uncertainty determined from 95 percent 
confidence intervals from standard errors calculated during Monte Carlo simulations 
(Section 8.4.2). 
8.4.4 
Uncertainty Deduction 
If total project uncertainty in year t, based on 95 percent confidence intervals, UTt ‚â§  30 percent  
then no deduction must result for uncertainty.  
If UTt  > 30 percent then the modified discounted value, Rt = Rtdisc for net anthropogenic GHG 
removal by sinks to account for uncertainty must be:  
İ¥‡Øß
‡Øó‡Øú‡Ø¶‡Øñ‡µå·à∫100 ‡µÜİ∑İ∂‡Øß·àª‡µàİ¥‡Øß
100
 
(53) 
Where: 
Rtdisc 
= Discounted net GHG emission reductions and removals by year t (tCO2e) 
UTt 
= Total project uncertainty 
Rt 
= Net GHG emission reductions and removals by year t (tCO2e) 
 
For Y years of the monitoring period, 
 
 İ¥‡Øí‡µå‚àë
İ¥‡Øß
‡Øó‡Øú‡Ø¶‡Øñ
‡Øó
‡Øß‡≠Ä‡¨µ
‡µÖ‚àë
İ¥‡Øß
‡Ø®
‡Øß‡≠Ä‡¨µ
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(54) 
Where:  
d 
= Number of years in which net removal must be discounted 
u 
= Number of years in which removals are not discounted 
Y 
= Number of years in the monitoring period (d + u) 
Rtdisc 
= Discounted net GHG emission reductions and removals by year t (tCO2e) 
VM0032, Version 1.0 
 
Sectoral Scope 14 
 
Page 51 
Rt 
= Net GHG emission reductions and removals by year t (tCO2e)