3  
DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in VCS document Program Definitions, the following 
definitions apply to this methodology: 
Applicable Fleets 
The class of EVs eligible and technically able to charge at EV chargers associated with the 
project. For LDV projects, these applicable fleets comprise2 BEVs and PHEVs for L1 and L2 
chargers, and BEVs for DCFCs. For HDV projects, these applicable fleets comprise the 
MDV/HDV electric vehicles eligible to charge at the project’s set of EV chargers. 
Associated Infrastructure (AI) 
Stationary battery storage devices3 and dedicated renewable energy systems (e.g., solar or 
biofuel from on-site or other locations which use dedicated direct transmission lines) integrated as 
part of EV charging systems and managed by their control units. Associated infrastructure 
includes on-site battery storage systems which can store and dispatch electricity to and/or from 
any on-site renewable power systems, the grid, and/or the EV batteries. Associated infrastructure 
also includes the EV batteries themselves and thus includes EV vehicle-to-grid (V2G) and EV to 
on-site battery exchanges of electricity.  
Associated Infrastructure Metering Systems 
Systems used to track electricity flows between AI devices, whether using meters and/or 
associated measurement systems within or external to the EV charger. These may include 
upstream metering on the grid-side of the adequate metering system (e.g., where meters are 
installed grid-side of an on-site battery) and/or downstream metering (e.g., where metering takes 
place within the charger unit itself, downstream of the on-site battery). 
Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) 
An EV which relies exclusively upon electricity delivered from an external EV charging system for 
its power in order to propel its motion 
Charging Networks 
A collection of charging systems which service any given applicable fleet  
Closed Charging Networks 
A collection of charging systems for which composition of the applicable fleet is constrained to a 
particular sub-set of EVs whose composition and operating characteristics of both the applicable 
                                                 
2 There may be a very few PHEVs which also have the plug capability to charge at DCFCs (e.g., Mitsubishi 
Outlander); these are considered de minimis. Similarly, the BMW i3 REX (with range extender) is technically a PHEV, 
but only 5% of i3s use the range extender in practice. Moreover, Argonne National Laboratory and California classify 
the REX as a BEV, and therefore it is included in the BEV category for default factor calculation purposes in this 
methodology.   
3 For larger powered systems (e.g., 150kw, 320kw), stationary battery systems may become a more typical integrated 
part of the EV charging system infrastructure over time (e.g., to mitigate demand peak charges from utilities); they are 
controlled by the charging system’s control unit and are located close to the site within the charging system’s 
metering to the utility. 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
6
and comparable fleets can be specifically identified and documented (e.g., a transit agency’s e-
bus charging network)  
Comparable Fleets 
Those fossil-fuel vehicles whose travel characteristics have been defined to be comparable to the 
EVs in each applicable fleet as determined in Section 4 below 
DC Fast Charger (DCFC) 
A charger which provides direct current charging (typically at 200-1000V) from an off-board4 
charger with a power rating above 11kw. Typical DCFC ratings are 50kw, with the newest 
systems for passenger vehicles in the 150kw and 320 kw ranges. DCFC classifications are 
defined as: 
 
DCFC 50kw: capable of delivering maximum power from 11kw to 62.5kw 
 
DCFC 100kw: capable of delivering maximum power from 63kw to 110kw (i.e., 200A) 
 
DCFC 150kw: capable of delivering maximum power from 111kw to 160kw (i.e., 
200A@800V or 350A@400V, some with cooled connectors) 
 
DCFC 320kw: capable of delivering maximum power from 161kw and 360kw (i.e., cooled 
connectors) 
 
DCFC 500kw: capable delivering maximum power from 361kw and above (i.e., different 
connectors) 
Where no kw classification is specified in this methodology, DCFC includes all classes defined 
above. 
Dedicated Renewable Energy 
Renewable power (e.g., solar, wind, and bio-fuel) supplied either from sources on-site within the 
associated infrastructure of the project, or received from a dedicated supply source via a direct 
transmission line. These renewable sources represent a distinct segment, differentiated from the 
renewable electricity supplied via the broader grid. These dedicated renewables may also be 
delivered in part for use on the main grid. 
Electric Vehicle (EV) 
Vehicles, including BEVs and PHEVs, spanning both passenger cars, LDVs and HDVs, powered 
by the external electricity sources of charging systems. EVs do not include hybrid-only vehicles 
since they do not consume electricity from externally generated sources. 
 
 
                                                 
4See SAE standards: 
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/earthobservationsSCC/IEEE_SAE_J1772_Update_10_02_08_Gery_Kissel.pdf  
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
7
EV Chargers 
Charging dispensers and their metering systems including L1, L2 and/or DCFC units which 
provide electricity to EVs within an applicable fleet and which may form part of an EV charging 
system   
EV Charging Systems 
A set of EV chargers including L1, L2 and/or DCFC and their associated infrastructure (if any) 
which, when located at a given charging site, provide electricity to EVs within a given applicable 
fleet, and which may form part of a charging network   
EV Market Share 
The number of EVs on the road within a geographic region, expressed as a percentage of total 
vehicles on the road within a geographic region, segmented for applicable fleets across LDV and 
HDV sectors 
Heavy Duty Vehicles (HDV) 
Vehicles consistent with definitions provided by the governing national regulatory system(s) of the 
project location. HDVs may also include medium duty vehicles (MDVs). These must be consistent 
with the data sources used in the standardized tests and default ER factors applied, if any5.  
Kwh/100 Mile Ratings 
Ratings as provided by credible national government/regulatory sources which establish the kwh 
consumed to travel 100 miles, sourced for each EV model within applicable fleets, and used to 
calculate the weighted average Applicable Fleet’s Electricity Consumption (AFEC) rating 
Level 1 Charger (L1) 
A charger which provides 120V alternating current charging services to the vehicle’s on-board 
charger with a power rating up to 1.8kw 
Level 2 Charger (L2)6 
A charger which provides 240V alternating current charging services to the vehicle’s on-board 
charger with a power rating up to 20kw (typically from 3.3kw to 6.6 kw) 
Light Duty Vehicles (LDV) 
Cars and trucks consistent with definitions provided by the governing national regulatory 
system(s) of the project location. These must be consistent with the data sources used in the 
standardized tests and default ER factors applied, if any7.  
                                                 
5 For example, in the United States, HDVs are specified as including both HDVs and those MDVs with Gross Vehicle 
Weight Ratings (GVWR) of more than 14,000lbs (typically from class 4 and above), consistent with the IHS Markit 
data sources applied in the development of the default factors. HDV vehicles include both e-buses and e-trucks. 
6 Note that, in London UK, L2 chargers have been referenced as fast chargers. And, DCFCs are referenced as rapid 
chargers.  Regardless of nomenclature, the chargers will be defined against the technical criteria provided in this 
methodology. 
7 For example, in the United States, LDVs are specified as including vehicles with) GVWR up to and including 
14,000lbs, (classes 1, 2, and 3) and must therefore include those Medium Duty Vehicles (MDVs) up to this same 
VM0038, Version 1.0 
Sectoral Scopes 1 & 7 
 
 
8
Medium and Heavy Duty Electric Vehicle (HDV EV) 
Medium duty and heavy duty vehicles (collectively defined as HDV) comprising both BEV and 
PHEV HDV electric vehicles, including e-buses and e-truck categories, which rely upon electricity 
delivered from external EV charging systems for their power 
Miles per gallon (MPG) ratings 
Mile per gallon ratings as provided by credible national government/regulatory sources establish 
the miles traveled per gallon of fuel consumed, for those fossil fuel vehicles deemed comparable 
per Section 4 to the EV’s applicable fleet8 
Open Charging Networks 
A charging network where the applicable fleet is not constrained to a particular sub-set of EVs 
whose composition and operating characteristics of both the applicable and comparable fleets 
can be identified and documented, as with a closed charging network 
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV) 
A vehicle combining an internal combustion engine and one or more electric motors, which must 
also be capable of receiving delivered electricity by plugging into an external EV charging system 
for its power in order to propel its motion 
Private Charging Networks 
Charging systems where charger access is limited to a defined applicable fleet. For example, 
residential chargers would be considered private since access is restricted, as would a city’s 
chargers if their use was limited to the charging of the city’s own EV fleet vehicles. Private refers 
to the limited degree of access to the chargers, not the charging system’s owner’s status (since 
public city chargers can use private charging networks). The composition of those EVs accessing 
the network need not be known (that is, both open (e.g., residential) and closed (e.g., e-bus 
transit agency charging) networks can be private if access is limited).