7 
ADDITIONALITY 
7.1  
Project Additionality 
The project baseline and additionality must be determined using a Project Method, following the 
procedures detailed in this section, and the guidance given in Section 7.2. The methods given in 
this section are based on the CDM Tool 02 Combined tool to identify the baseline scenario and 
demonstrate additionality20. 
7.1.1 
Introduction  
Identification of the baseline scenario and determination of additionality for a project must follow a 
step-wise approach. The required steps are:  
Step 1: Identification of alternative scenarios;  
Step 2: Barrier analysis;  
Step 3: Investment analysis; and  
Step 4: Common practice analysis.  
7.1.2 
Steps 
Step 1: Identification of baseline and alternative scenarios  
This step serves to identify all the alternative scenarios to the proposed project activity(s) which 
could be the baseline scenario.   
 
20 Found at: http://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-02-v5.0.0.pdf 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
27 
Where the proponent has a history of managing the project area, the proponent must provide 
documented evidence of the project proponent’s operating history, such as five or more years of 
management records, to provide evidence of normal historical practices, and this information 
must be considered in defining and evaluating the alternative baseline scenarios.  Note however 
that evidence of operating history over a specified time period does not itself determine the 
baseline scenario, as special factors, not expected to exist in the future, may have influenced the 
proponent’s management of the area during that time. 
For REDD projects, where ownership of the project area has not changed, the project proponent 
must provide evidence to demonstrate, based on government plans (for publicly owned and 
managed lands), community plans (for publicly owned and community managed lands), licensee 
plans (for publicly owned lands managed by licensees) or landowner plans (for privately owned 
lands), that the project area was intended to be cleared.   
Where the project proponent is a new owner or manager, for REDD, RIL and LtPF projects the 
baseline scenario must be based on the projected management activities of the most likely owner 
or manager or class of owner or manager who would have managed the project area in the 
absence of the project, providing that these actions were consistent with law, government land 
use planning, and other constraints.  The most likely management activities must be determined 
using the procedures outlined in steps 1b, 2 and 3 below.  In cases where a specific “most likely 
owner or manager” cannot be identified, the baseline scenario must be based on the common 
characteristics and rates of deforestation for the most likely types of owners or manager expected 
to manage the project area.  Determination of these characteristics and rates of deforestation 
must be based on an analysis of the recent historic practices of this type of owner or manager 
within the region around the project area. 
For ARR and IFM projects, the baseline scenario must reflect at minimum the local common 
practices for areas comparable to the project area, and must not result in projected baseline GHG 
emissions from the project area greater than those that would occur under the relevant local 
common practice.  However, if local common practices are unsustainable, and unsustainable 
practices are inconsistent with the mission or historical practices of the new owner or 
management entity, the baseline must reflect at minimum sustainable practices. 
Step 1a: Define alternative scenarios to the proposed project activity  
Identify all alternative scenarios that:  
1. Are available to the project proponent, or an alternative owner or manager who might be 
managing the project area under the proposed scenario, and; 
2. Cannot be implemented in parallel to the proposed project activity, and 
can occur within the project area, and; 
3. Are based on environmental practices not less rigorous than common practice among 
forest managers in the area. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
28 
These alternative scenarios must include:  
4. Type S1: The proposed project activity undertaken without being registered as a GHG 
reduction project. 
5. Type S2: Where applicable, a situation where no investment or action is undertaken by 
the project proponents, but third party(s) undertake(s) investments or actions which 
provide the same output to users of the project activity.  For example, in the case of an 
ARR project, an alternative scenario may be that the project proponent would not invest 
in planting, but that trees would be planted by others.  
6. Type S3: Where applicable, the continuation of the current situation, not requiring  any 
investment or expenses beyond business as usual expenses to maintain the current 
situation, such as, for example:  
i. 
The continued management of an area for forest harvest, instead of conversion 
and development. 
ii. 
Land continuing in an unused, degraded state.  
7. Type S4: Where applicable, the continuation of the current situation, requiring an 
investment or expenses to maintain the current situation, such as, for example:  
iii. 
Continued harvest and processing of timber at existing rates and using existing 
silvicultural and manufacturing techniques and technologies. 
8. Type S5: Other plausible and credible alternative scenarios to the project activity 
scenario, including the common practices in the relevant sector, which could occur on the 
same land base. 
If the proposed project activity includes several different facilities, technologies, or outputs, or 
areas of land with different potential uses, alternative scenarios for each of them may be 
identified separately.  Plausible combinations of these may be considered as possible alternative 
scenarios to the proposed project activity. 
For the purpose of identifying relevant alternative scenarios, provide an overview of other 
technologies or practices that provide the same output as the proposed project activity, or that 
can occur on the same land base, and that have been implemented previously or are currently 
underway in the applicable geographical area. The applicable geographical area may include 
preferably at least ten areas that provide the same output or occur on the same kind of land base 
as the proposed project activity, not including other projects which include GHG reduction 
incentives.  Provide relevant documentation to support the results of the analysis.  
The description of the alternative baseline scenarios must provide relevant information 
concerning present or future conditions, such as legislative, technical, economic, socio-cultural, 
environmental, geographic, site-specific and temporal factors, assumptions or projections, and 
these factors must be considered in the steps below. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
29 
 
 
 
Step 1b: Consistency with mandatory applicable laws and regulations  
The alternative scenario(s) must be in compliance with all mandatory applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements, even if these laws and regulations have objectives other than GHG 
reductions, eg, to mitigate local air pollution.  (National, provincial or local policies that do not have 
legally-binding status are not required to be considered.  
If the proposed project activity is the only alternative scenario among the ones considered by the 
project proponent that is in compliance with all mandatory regulations, the proposed project 
activity is not additional.  
 
 
 
 
 
Step 2: Barrier analysis  
This step serves to identify barriers and to assess which alternative scenarios are prevented by 
these barriers.  
In applying Steps 2a and 2b, provide transparent and documented evidence, and offer 
conservative interpretations of this evidence, as to how it demonstrates the existence and 
significance of the identified barriers and whether alternative scenarios are prevented by these 
barriers. The type of evidence to be provided must include at least one of the following:  
1. Relevant legislation, regulatory information or industry norms;  
2. Relevant (sectoral) studies or surveys (eg, market surveys, technology studies, etc.) 
undertaken by universities, research institutions, industry associations, companies, 
bilateral/multilateral institutions, etc.;  
3. Relevant statistical data from national or international statistics;  
4. Documentation of relevant market data (eg, market prices, tariffs, rules);  
5. Written documentation from the company or institution developing or implementing the 
project activity or the project proponent, such as minutes from Board meetings, 
correspondence, feasibility studies, financial or budgetary information, etc.;  
Outcome of Step 1a: A description of plausible alternative scenarios to the project activity, to 
be considered when selecting the project’s baseline scenario, using the steps below. 
Outcome of Step 1b: List of alternative scenarios to the project activity that are in compliance 
with mandatory legislation and regulations. 
If the above-mentioned list contains only one scenario, namely: S1 - the proposed project 
activity undertaken without being registered as a  GHG reduction project activity, then the 
proposed project activity is not additional and any remaining procedures of this tool are not 
applicable. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
30 
6. Documents prepared by the project proponent, contractors or project partners in the 
context of the proposed project activity or similar previous project implementations; 
written documentation of independent expert judgements from industry, educational 
institutions (eg, universities, technical schools, training centres), industry associations 
and others. 
Step 2a: Identify barriers that would prevent the implementation of alternative scenarios  
Establish a complete list of plausible and credible barriers that may prevent alternative scenarios 
from occurring. Such plausible and credible barriers may include:  
1. Investment barriers, other than insufficient financial returns as analyzed in Step 3.  For 
instance, situations where similar activities have only been implemented with grants or 
with other non-commercial finance. Similar activities are defined as activities that rely on 
a broadly similar technology or practices, are of a similar scale, take place in a 
comparable environment with respect to regulatory framework, and are undertaken in the 
applicable geographical area as defined in Step 1a above. 
2. Technological barriers, inter alia:  
i. 
Skilled and/or properly trained labor to operate and maintain the scenario are not 
available in the applicable geographical area, which leads to an unacceptably 
high risk of failure or underperformance; 
ii. 
Lack of infrastructure for implementation and logistics for maintenance of the 
scenario (eg, road network does not allow efficient forest fertilization); 
iii. 
Risk of technological failure: the process/technology failure risk in the local 
circumstances is significantly greater than for other technologies that provide 
services or outputs comparable to those of the proposed project activity, as 
demonstrated by relevant scientific literature or technology manufacturer 
information (eg, use of ground based equipment for selective harvesting within 
the project area may result in unacceptable damage to harvested or retained 
timber); 
iv. 
The particular technology used in the proposed scenario is not available in the 
applicable geographical area (eg, the project involves importing new logging 
machinery that has never been used in context of the geographical area). 
3. Legal barriers.  The project activity faces certain legal barriers that prevent it from being 
undertaken.  However, the potential to generate emission reductions/removals help to 
convince regulators (provincial, municipal, etc.) to reconsider the project activities, work 
with the proponent to address any areas of concern, and adjust the legal requirements to 
permit the activity.  The situation where a project creates emission reductions or 
removals partially or wholly through an agreement with government to change legislation 
or regulation for the purposes of increasing carbon sequestration and thereby creating 
incremental emissions reductions may constitute evidence of additionality. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
31 
 
 
 
Step 2b: Eliminate alternative scenarios which are prevented by the identified barriers  
Identify which alternative scenarios are prevented by at least one of the barriers listed in Step 2a, 
and eliminate those alternative scenarios from further consideration. All alternative scenarios 
must be compared to the same set of barriers. The assessment of the significance of barriers 
may take into account the level of access to and availability of information, technologies and 
skilled labour in the specific context of the industry where the project type is located.  For 
example, projects located in sectors with small and medium sized enterprises may not have the 
same means to overcome technological barriers as projects in a sector where typically large or 
international companies operate.  
 
 
Outcome of Step 2a: A description of the barriers that may prevent one or more alternative 
scenarios from occurring, including a justification of the reasonableness of the identified 
barriers. 
Outcome of Step 2b: A list of alternative scenarios to the project activity that are not 
prevented by any barrier. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 3: Investment analysis  
The objective of Step 3 is to compare the economic or financial attractiveness of the alternative 
scenarios remaining after Step 2 by conducting an investment analysis. The analysis must 
Outcome of Step 2: 
If there is only one scenario that is not prevented by any barrier, then the following applies: 
1. If this alternative scenario is the proposed project activity undertaken without being 
registered as a GHG reduction activity, then the project activity is not additional.  
If this alternative scenario is not the proposed project activity, then this alternative is 
identified as the baseline scenario.  In this case, demonstrate, using quantitative and/or 
qualitative evidence, how the registration of the project activity as a GHG reduction activity 
overcomes identified barriers which prevent the proposed project activity from occurring in 
the absence of registration as a GHG reduction activity. If registration alleviates these 
barriers, proceed to Step 3.  Otherwise, it is not additional. 
2. If there is more than one alternative scenario that is not prevented by any barrier, then the 
following applies:  
i. 
If the alternative scenarios include the proposed project activity undertaken without 
being registered as a GHG reduction project activity, then proceed to Step 3 
(investment analysis). 
ii. 
If the alternative scenarios do not include the proposed project activity undertaken 
without being registered as a GHG reduction project activity, then:  
a. If registration alleviates the identified barriers that prevent the proposed project 
activity from occurring, project participants must complete Step 3 (investment 
analysis). 
b. If registration as a GHG reduction activity does not alleviate the identified 
barriers that prevent the proposed project activity from occurring, then the 
project activity is not additional. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
33 
include all alternative scenarios remaining after Step 2, including scenarios where the project 
proponent does not undertake an investment (S2 or S3).  
Step 3a: Identification of the financial indicator 
Identify the financial indicator, such as IRR, NPV, cost benefit ratio, or unit cost of production (eg. 
Production cost per cubic meter of processed timber or per bone dry tonne of pulp) most suitable 
for the project type and decision-making context.  If one of the alternative scenarios remaining 
after Step 2 corresponds to the situation described in S2 or S3, then use either the NPV or the 
IRR as financial indicator in the analysis.  
Step 3b: Calculation of alternatives 
Calculate the suitable financial indicator for all alternative scenarios remaining after Step 2. 
Include all relevant costs (including, for example, investment operations and maintenance costs), 
and revenues (including subsidies/fiscal incentives, etc. where applicable), and, as appropriate, 
non-market costs and benefits in the case of public investors if this is standard practice for the 
selection of public investments. 
For alternative scenarios that correspond to the situation described in S2 or S3 and that do not 
involve any investment costs, operational costs or revenues, use the following values for the 
financial indicator to reflect such a situation:  
1. If the financial indicator is the NPV: Assume a value of NPV equal to zero;  
2. If the financial indicator is the IRR: Use as the IRR the financial benchmark, as 
determined through the options (1) to (5) below.  
The financial/economic analysis must be based on parameters that are standard in the market, 
considering the specific characteristics of the project type, but not linked to the subjective 
profitability expectation or risk profile of a particular project proponent. In the particular case 
where the project activity can only be implemented by the project proponent, the specific 
financial/economic situation of the company undertaking the project activity can be considered. 
The discount rate (in the case of the NPV) or the financial benchmark (in the case of the IRR) 
may be derived from one or more of:  
3. Government bond rates, increased by a suitable risk premium to reflect private 
investment and/or the project type, as substantiated by an independent (financial) expert 
or documented by official publicly available financial data; 
4. Estimates of the cost of financing and required return on capital (eg, commercial lending 
rates and guarantees required for the country and the type of project activity concerned), 
based on banker’s views and private equity investors/funds’ required return on 
comparable projects;  
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
34 
5. A company internal financial benchmark (weighted average cost of capital of the 
company), only in the particular case that the project activity can only be implemented by 
the project proponent. The project proponents must demonstrate that this financial 
benchmark has been consistently used in the past, ie, that project activities under similar 
conditions developed by the same company used the same financial benchmark;  
6. A government/officially approved financial benchmark where it can be demonstrated that 
such financial benchmarks are used for investment decisions;  
7. Any other indicators if the project proponent can demonstrate that the above options are 
not applicable and their indicator is appropriately justified.  
Present the investment analysis in the documentation submitted for validation in a transparent 
manner and provide all the relevant assumptions, so that a reader can reproduce the analysis 
and obtain the same results. Refer to critical techno-economic parameters and assumptions 
(such as capital costs, fuel prices, lifetimes, and discount rate or cost of capital). Justify and/or 
cite assumptions in a manner that can be validated. In calculating the financial indicator, the risks 
of the alternative scenarios can be included through the cash flow pattern, subject to project-
specific expectations and assumptions (eg, insurance premiums can be used in the calculation to 
reflect specific risk equivalents). Assumptions and input data for the investment analysis must not 
differ across alternative scenarios, unless differences can be well substantiated.  
Each of the scenarios examined must be ranked according to the financial indicator. 
Include a sensitivity analysis to assess whether the conclusion regarding the financial 
attractiveness of each scenario is robust to reasonable variations in the critical assumptions. The 
investment comparison analysis provides a valid argument in identifying the baseline scenario 
only if it consistently supports (for a plausible range of assumptions) the conclusion that one 
alternative scenario is the most economically and/or financially attractive. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Step 4: Common practice analysis  
Complete an analysis of the extent to which the proposed project type (eg, technology or 
practice) has already diffused in the relevant sector and applicable geographical area. This test is 
a credibility check to demonstrate additionality and complements the barrier analysis (Step 2) 
and, where applicable, the investment analysis (Step 3).  
Provide an analysis of the extent to which similar activities to the proposed project activity have 
been implemented previously or are currently underway. Similar activities are defined as activities 
(ie, technologies or practices) that are of similar scale, take place in a comparable environment, 
inter alia, with respect to the regulatory framework, and are undertaken in the applicable 
geographical area as defined in Step 1a above. Other registered or validated GHG reduction 
project activities are not to be included in this analysis. Provide documented evidence and, where 
relevant, quantitative information. On the basis of that analysis, describe whether and to which 
extent similar activities have already diffused in the applicable geographical area.  
If similar activities to the proposed project activity are identified, then compare the proposed 
project activity to the other similar activities and assess whether there are essential distinctions 
between the proposed project activity and the similar activities. If this is the case, point out and 
explain the essential distinctions between the proposed project activity and the similar activities 
and explain why the similar activities enjoyed certain benefits that rendered them financially 
Outcome of Step 3: Ranking of the short list of alternative baseline scenarios according to the 
most suitable financial indicator, taking into account the results of the sensitivity analysis.  
If the sensitivity analysis is not conclusive, then the alternative scenario to the project activity 
with greatest GHG removals (or least emissions, in the case that all alternatives are net 
emitters) over the crediting period among the alternative scenarios is considered as the 
baseline scenario. If the sensitivity analysis confirms the result of the investment comparison 
analysis, then the most economically or financially attractive alternative scenario is considered 
as baseline scenario. 
Note that the baseline scenario for a REDD project must result in a Land Use and Land Cover 
change from a forested to an unforested state.  If at this stage the identified baseline scenario 
does not include a Land Use and Land Cover change – for instance, if the area remains forest 
used for timber production under the most likely baseline, than the project cannot be a REDD 
project, although it is possible that it may be an IFM project, 
If the alternative identified in step 3 as the baseline scenario is the proposed project activity 
undertaken without being registered as a British Columbia GHG reduction activity, then the 
project activity is not additional. Otherwise, proceed to Step 4. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
36 
attractive (eg,, subsidies or other financial flows) and which the proposed project activity cannot 
use or why the similar activities did not face barriers to which the proposed project activity is 
subject. 
Essential distinctions may include a serious change in circumstances under which the proposed 
GHG reduction project activity will be implemented when compared to circumstances under which 
similar projects were carried out.  For example, new barriers may have arisen, or promotional 
policies may have ended, leading to a situation in which the proposed  GHG reduction project 
activity would not be implemented without the incentive provided by registration of the activity as 
a GHG reduction activity.  The change must be fundamental and verifiable. 
The proposed project activity is regarded as “common practice” if similar activities can be 
observed and essential distinctions between the proposed GHG reduction project activity and 
similar activities cannot be identified. 
 
7.1.3  
Documentation Requirements 
Documentation of the steps and process completed to determine the project’s baseline scenario, 
must include elements identified in the steps above.  In addition to the information required in the 
VCS project document and representations, these must include:  
1. An assertion by the proponent that the baseline scenario will result in a conservative 
estimate of the greenhouse gas reduction to be achieved by the project, considering: 
i. 
existing or proposed regulatory requirements relevant to any aspect of the 
baseline scenario; 
ii. 
provincial or federal incentives relevant to any aspect of the baseline scenario, 
including tax incentives or grants that may be available; 
iii. 
the financial implications of carrying out a course of action referred to in the 
baseline scenario, and 
iv. 
any other factor relevant to justify the claim that the baseline scenario is 
reasonably likely to occur if the project is not carried out; 
Outcome of Step 4: If outcome of Step 4 is that the proposed project activity is not regarded 
as “common practice”, then the proposed project activity is additional. 
If outcome of Step 4 is that the proposed project activity is regarded as “common practice” 
then the proposed project activity is not additional, unless it can be demonstrated that 
material and lasting changes in conditions have occurred since similar projects were carried 
out, which make it unlikely that further projects of this type would be implemented in the 
absence of incentives for GHG benefits. 
 
v3.3                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
37 
2. An assertion by the proponent that there are financial, technological or other obstacles to 
carrying out the project that are overcome or partially overcome by the incentives 
resulting from  the greenhouse gas project , and a justification for the assertion (Steps 2 
and 3); 
3. An assertion by the proponent that the project start date is no earlier than November 29, 
2007.