8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
Biochar is made from a diverse array of feedstocks and may be produced with a wide variety of 
technologies. Life cycle assessment (LCA) studies of biochar indicate that the climate benefits 
of biochar material are highly variable and dependent on many factors. For example, if fossil 
fuel energy (diesel, gasoline, propane) is used to chip, grind, transport, and dry feedstocks then 
the GHG benefits of biochar to soil and non-soil applications may be reduced or eliminated 
(Hedley et al., 2020; Puettmann et al., 2017; Sahoo et al., 2021). 
Biochar production systems vary substantially by technology type. During production, there are 
mix of emissions including carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and soot. Carbon in biomass is 
biogenic, and part of the active natural carbon cycle. Because the CO2 released during biochar 
production has been recently captured from the atmosphere and stored in plant tissues 
through photosynthesis, biomass is generally considered carbon neutral. However, emissions of 
CH4 and soot have a more powerful global warming potential than CO2 (Amonette et al 2021). 
Eligible high technology production systems involve some form of post-pyrolysis combustion 
process such as funneling gases through an afterburner (to control CO2 and CH4 production), 
re-injection of gases into the pyrolysis system to increase efficiency of production, and/or using 
the excess heat produced to generate electricity or other useful purposes. (See Section 3 for 
complete definitions and eligibility conditions for high technology and low technology production 
facilities). 
Eligible low technology production systems lack the same controls as high-technology 
production systems; however, project proponents must be able to demonstrate that the low-
technology system used is minimizing CH4 and soot production. Examples of low-technology 
systems that meet the criteria for minimizing CH4 and soot are those that harness the natural 
convection processes to create a combustion zone above the pyrolysis zone, as excess 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
19 
methane may be produced, particularly at start-up and shut-down, that may counter the long-
term sequestration benefits of biochar. 
Biochar GHG benefits may increase if the syngas or bio-oil produced are used to replace fossil 
fuel-based (mainly coal) energy sources. However, the reverse may be true if diesel fuel or 
propane are used during production or processing of feedstocks. Furthermore, the methodology 
eliminates the use of technologies and feedstocks that lead to health and safety issues, 
unwanted environmental emissions, and contamination risk in soils. 
Biochar materials are most used in soil applications; however, non-soil applications are 
increasingly common, for example as an asphalt additive or addition to concrete mixes. The 
total GHG benefits of biochar are therefore influenced both by the type of feedstocks or the 
technology used, and the potential fossil fuel inputs used to create the final product. GHG 
inputs may include fossil fuel or electrical energy used for waste biomass pre-treatment or 
biochar post-treatment.  
Given the diversity and complexity of biochar GHG accounting, existing biochar certification 
programs like the European Biochar Certificate (EBC) and this methodology limit feedstock 
types, the technologies that may be used to produce biochar, and the type of products that 
qualify.  
The methodology provides a complete, robust, and credible approach to quantifying net GHG 
removals resulting from biochar management, including at the stages of waste biomass 
sourcing, production, and application of biochar. Baseline and project emissions consider the 
flux of CH4, N2O, and CO2 and are defined and quantified in terms of tonnes of CO2e per year.  
To facilitate the future inclusion of further feedstocks and other biochar end-uses, the GHG 
quantification is set up in a framework, which allows a broad approach to estimate the climate 
impacts of the biochar value chain. This framework includes:  
• 
The sourcing stage, where waste biomass is sourced and collected, 
• 
The production stage, during which waste biomass is prepared (if applicable) and 
thermochemically converted into biochar and, 
• 
The application stage, where the biochar is applied to a long term end-use (in soils or 
eligible non-soil applications).  
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
8.1.1 Sourcing Stage 
The baseline scenario is the situation where, in the absence of the project activity, waste 
biomass would have been left to decay or would have been combusted for purposes other than 
energy production in the year that the biochar is made within the project boundary. 
Following the CDM EB23 Annex 18: Definition of renewable biomass, waste biomass may be 
classified as renewable. As the decay rate pathway of diverse feedstock types varies by region 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
20 
and time, the methodology defines the default net baseline emission avoidance as zero 
following a conservative scenario (BESS,y). 
8.1.2 Production Stage 
In the baseline scenario at production stage, no biochar is produced for the purpose of the 
project activity and therefore no GHG removals or related emissions are considered.  
8.1.3 Application Stage 
Emissions at application stage refer to GHG emissions associated with the post-production and 
end-use application of biochar. In the baseline scenario at application stage, since no biochar 
was produced, no GHG removals or related emissions are considered.  
8.2 
Project Emissions 
8.2.1 Sourcing Stage 
At the sourcing stage, the methodology relies on the collection of waste biomass. Therefore, the 
emissions at the sourcing stage (PESS,y) are set to zero. 
8.2.2 Production Stage 
In the project scenario, the net GHG balance depends on the organic carbon content at the 
biochar production stage. Equation 1 summarizes the carbon balance at the production stage 
by comparing the difference between the stabilized carbon content in the biochar and the 
resulting project emissions from feedstock pre-treatment (where applicable) and from 
conversion of waste biomass into biochar. The former includes emissions from energy 
consumption of drying and pre-processing feedstocks, and the latter includes other relevant 
emissions from the production facilities. The project emission removals during production at 
the biochar facility are as follows: 
𝐸𝑅𝑃𝑆,𝑦= ∑((∑𝐶𝐶𝑡,𝑘,𝑦
𝑘
× 44
12) −(∑𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑆,𝑡,𝑝,𝑦
𝑝
))
𝑡
 
(1) 
Where: 
ERPS,y 
= GHG emissions removals at production stage in year y (tCO2e) 
CCt,k,y 
= Organic carbon content on a dry weight basis for biochar type t used for 
application type k in year y (tonnes) 
PEPS,t,p,y 
= Project emissions at production stage for production of biochar type t at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
44
12 
= Coefficient to convert organic carbon to tCO2e 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
21 
As production facilities and technologies differ in terms of potential to measure and report 
relevant parameters, the methodology provides two options (low and high technology) to derive 
the respective parameters based on characteristics of the technology used in the production 
facility. Further, as the biochar produced may be utilized differently in the project activity (both 
in soil and in non-soil applications), different decay rates must be considered for the respective 
mass of biochar utilized amongst different applications.  
8.2.2.1 Option P.1: High Technology Production Facility 
High technology production facilities are defined in Section 3. If any of the conditions in this 
definition are not met, the production facility must be categorized immediately as a low 
technology production facility. 
For all high technology facilities, organic carbon content of the produced biochar must be 
derived from material analysis conducted via established laboratory and standardized methods. 
Project proponents must determine organic carbon content on a dry weight basis using 
methods described in the latest version of the IBI Biochar Testing Guidelines or EBC Production 
Guidelines or other internationally/nationally accredited standards. 
Step 1: Estimate organic carbon content (CCt,k,y) of biochar for high technology facilities 
The total organic carbon content of the produced biochar is the foundation for the GHG 
calculation. The value is derived from the mass of biochar, its respective organic carbon 
content, and the decay rate of organic carbon in the biochar taken over a period of 100 years 
(100-year permanence value which is based on 100-year global warming potential horizon).  
The methodology provides default decay values when the biochar is used in soil applications. If 
the project proponent produces biochar for eligible non-soil applications, the project proponent 
must either provide a permanence value or utilize conservative default factors (i.e., the soil 
decay value).  
The total organic carbon content on a dry weight basis attributable to the project activity is 
estimated as follows: 
𝐶𝐶𝑡,𝑘,𝑦= ∑(𝑀𝑡,𝑘,𝑝,𝑦× 𝐹𝐶𝑝,𝑡,𝑝× 𝑃𝑅𝑑𝑒,𝑘)
𝑝
 
(2) 
Where: 
CCt,k,y 
= Organic carbon content on a dry weight basis for biochar type t used for 
application type k in year y (tonnes). Biochar type is based on the feedstock used 
to produce the biochar. 
Mt,k,p,y  
= Mass on a dry weight basis of biochar type t for application type k produced at the 
production facility p in year y (tonnes)  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
22 
FCp,t,p 
= Organic carbon content of biochar type t produced in production facility p per 
tonne of biochar, taken on a dry weight basis (percent). For high technology 
production facilities, this is defined through laboratory material analysis of biochar. 
PRde,k 
= Permanence adjustment factor due to decay of biochar per application type k 
(dimensionless) 
PRde,k must be established for soil or non-soil end-use as follows: 
• 
Soil end-use: See Table 3 which draws from IPCC (2019) and Woolf et al. (2021) and 
uses production temperatures Tprod to determine conservative defaults for PRde,k. 
Table 3. Default values for PRde,k from Table 4AP.2 of IPCC (2019) 
Temperature 
Default Value 
High temperature pyrolysis and gasification 
(> 600 °C) 
0.89 
Medium temperature pyrolysis (450 – 600 
°C) 
0.80 
Low temperature (350 – 450 °C) 
0.65 
• 
Non-soil end-use: Where no scientifically robust information on the permanence of 
organic carbon content is available, project proponents must use the soil application 
decay factor in Table 3. Project proponents may propose any other value for PRde,k as a 
substitute for the values in Table 3. The project proponent must provide at least one 
form of evidence of the proposed value of PRde,k following the requirements for default 
factors established in Section 2.5.2 of the latest version of the VCS Methodology 
Requirements. Where the scientific literature proposes different values of PRde,k the 
project proponent must adopt the lower value to ensure conservativeness. 
Documentation and information such as white papers or non-peer reviewed research 
papers are not considered as credible and appropriate forms of evidence. 
 
Step 2: Estimate project emissions (PEPS,p,y) for high technology production facilities 
Emissions under the project scenario are determined using the following equation: 
𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑆,𝑝,𝑦= (𝑃𝐸𝐷,𝑝,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝑃,𝑝,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝐶,𝑝,𝑦) ×
∑∑𝑀𝑡,𝑘,𝑝,𝑦
𝑘
𝑡
𝑀𝑝,𝑦
 
(3) 
Where:  
PEPS,p,y 
= Project emissions at the production stage for production of biochar at production 
facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
23 
PED,p,y 
= Emissions associated with the pre-treatment of waste biomass at production 
facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PEP,p,y 
= Emissions associated with the conversion of waste biomass into biochar at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PEC,p,y 
= Emissions due to the utilization of auxiliary energy for the purpose of pyrolysis at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
Mt,k,p,y 
= Mass on a dry weight basis of biochar type t for application type k produced at 
production facility p in year y (tonnes)   
Mp,y 
= Total mass of biochar on a dry weight basis produced in production facility p in 
year y (tonnes) 
Determining PED,p,y: Emissions associated with pre-treatment of feedstock at production facility 
p in year y   
Energy consumption for any necessary pre-treatment of waste biomass must be accounted for. 
This may include feedstock preparation (e.g., feedstock agglomeration, homogenization, 
pelletizing) either inside the production facility or in field preparation, drying of wet waste 
biomass, or other processes. If the energy source is renewable, PED,p,y must be zero. Otherwise, 
it must be calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝐷,𝑝,𝑦 = 𝑃𝐸𝐷𝐸,𝑝,𝑦 + 𝑃𝐸𝐷𝐹,𝑝,𝑦 
(4) 
Where:  
PED,p,y 
= Emissions associated with pre-treatment of feedstock at production facility p in 
year y (tCO2e) 
PEDE,p,y  
= Emissions associated with use of grid-connected electricity utilized for pre-
treatment of waste biomass at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). PEDE,p,y  must 
be calculated as per the provisions of CDM TOOL05: Baseline, project and/or 
leakage emissions from electricity consumption and monitoring of electricity 
generation.17 
PEDF,p,y   
= Emissions associated with combustion of fossil fuels utilized for pre-treatment of 
waste biomass at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). PEDF,p,y  must be calculated 
as per the provisions of CDM TOOL03: Tool to calculate project or leakage CO2 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion.18 
Determining PEP,p,y: Emissions associated with the thermochemical process at production facility 
p in year y for high technology facilities 
Processing of waste biomass refers to the pyrolysis process, which fixes the organic carbon 
from biomass into permanent carbon in biochar. The value PEP,p,y  accounts for the emissions 
 
17 Available at https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-05-v3.0.pdf  
18 Available at https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-03-v3.pdf  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
24 
from pyrolysis, which are emitted into the atmosphere. In alignment with eligibility requirements 
for high technology production facilities, net emissions are considered de minimis.19 Therefore,  
𝑃𝐸𝑃,𝑝,𝑦 = 0 
 
Where: 
PEP,p,y 
= Emissions associated with the conversion of waste biomass into biochar at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
Determining PEC,p,y: Emissions due to the utilization of auxiliary energy for the purpose of pyrolysis 
at production facility p in year y 
When external energy is required to initiate and maintain the pyrolysis reactor, it must be 
accounted as project emissions. If the source of auxiliary energy is renewable, PEC,p,y must be 
zero. Otherwise, it must be calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝐶,𝑝,𝑦 = 𝑃𝐸𝐶𝐸,𝑝,𝑦 + 𝑃𝐸𝐶𝐹,𝑝,𝑦 
(5) 
Where:  
PEC,p,y 
= Emissions due to the utilization of auxiliary energy for the purpose of pyrolysis at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PECE,p,y  
= Emissions associated with use of grid-connected electricity utilized for starting the 
reactor at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). PECE,p,y must be calculated as per 
CDM TOOL05: Baseline, project and/or leakage emissions from electricity 
consumption and monitoring of electricity generation. 
PECF,p,y 
= Emissions associated with combustion of fossil fuels utilized for starting the 
reactor at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). PECF,p,y must be calculated as per 
the provisions of CDM TOOL03: Tool to calculate project or leakage CO2 emissions 
from fossil fuel combustion. 
8.2.2.2 Option P.2: Low Technology Production Facility  
Technologically less advanced production facilities usually have lower efficiency of converting 
organic carbon and often lack emissions controls during the production process. However, 
these also play an important role in carbon removal associated with production and use in 
certain cases, e.g., smallholder and farm level settings. Low technology production facilities are 
all production facilities that do not meet the conditions defined under high technology 
production.  
 
19 Following condition (a) of the definition of a high technology production facility, the ability to combust or recover 
pyrolysis gases, thereby limiting the emissions of methane to the atmosphere. 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
25 
Step 1: Estimate organic carbon content (CCt,k,y) of biochar for low technology facilities 
As with high technology settings, in low technology settings the total organic carbon content of 
the produced biochar is the foundation of the GHG calculations. The value is derived from the 
mass of biochar, its respective organic carbon content, and the decay rate of organic carbon in 
the biochar taken over a period of 100 years (100-year permanence value). 
For low technology production facilities, a conservative approach has been selected, related to 
the organic carbon content of biochar (FCp), based on feedstock type and heating temperature 
as provided in Table 4 which draws from IPCC Method for Estimating the Change in Mineral Soil 
Organic Carbon Stocks from Biochar Amendments: Basis for Future Methodological 
Development.20 In Equation 6, permanence (the fraction of carbon in the biochar remaining 
after 100 years) is included.  
𝐶𝐶𝑡,𝑘,𝑦= ∑(𝑀𝑡,𝑘,𝑝,𝑦× 𝐹𝐶𝑝,𝑡,𝑝× 𝑃𝑅𝑑𝑒,𝑘)
𝑝
 
(6) 
Where: 
CCt,k,y 
= Organic carbon content on a dry weight basis for biochar type t used for 
application type k in year y (tonnes). Biochar type is based on the feedstock used 
to produce the biochar. 
Mt,k,p,y 
= Mass on a dry weight basis of biochar type t for application type k produced at 
production facility p in year y (tonnes)  
FCp,t,p  
= Organic carbon content of biochar type t produced in production facility p per 
tonne of biochar, taken on a dry weight basis (percent). For low technology 
production facilities. this is determined through laboratory material analysis of 
biochar where possible. Otherwise, values are obtained from Table 4 per type of 
feedstock. Where feedstocks are mixed, the most conservative value of the 
relevant feedstocks must be used. 
PRde,k 
= Permanence adjustment factor due to decay of biochar to be defined for 
application type k (dimensionless). Biochar is subject to natural decay rate when 
used in soil applications such as in agriculture, forests, croplands, or grasslands. 
Many low technology production facilities do not measure the temperature at 
biochar production. A default value of 0.5621 must be used where pyrolysis 
temperature is unknown. This follows a conservative approach for carbon 
permanence. 
Determining FCp: Values for organic carbon content per tonne of biochar per production type 
The organic carbon content must be determined in a qualified laboratory following IBI Biochar 
Testing Guidelines or EBC Production Guidelines on the production of biochar. However, project 
 
20 Available at https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/pdf/4_Volume4/19R_V4_Ch02_Ap4_Biochar.pdf  
21 Value of 0.56 is used where the temperature of pyrolysis is not measured, recorded and reported. Default value taken 
from Figure 4Ap.1(b) in IPCC (2019) Appendix 4: Method for Estimating the Change in Mineral Soil Organic Carbon 
Stocks from Biochar Amendments: Basis for Future Methodological Development. Available at https://www.ipcc-
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/pdf/4_Volume4/19R_V4_Ch02_Ap4_Biochar.pdf 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
26 
proponents using low technology production facilities may adopt values from IPCC (2019) for 
different feedstocks and production types (Table 4). Further, project proponents may also refer 
to other scientific literature such as Woolf et al. (2021).  
Table 4. Values for organic carbon content in biochar from Table 4AP.1 of IPCC (2019) 
Feedstock 
Production Process 
Values for FCp 
Animal manure 
 
Pyrolysis 
0.38 
Gasification 
0.09 
Wood 
Pyrolysis 
0.77 
Gasification 
0.52 
Herbaceous (grasses, forbs, leaves; 
excluding rice husks and rice straw) 
Pyrolysis 
0.65 
Gasification 
0.28 
Rice husks and rice straw 
Pyrolysis 
0.49 
Gasification 
0.13 
Nut shells, pits, and stones 
Pyrolysis 
0.74 
Gasification 
0.40 
Biosolids (paper sludge) 
Pyrolysis 
0.35 
Gasification 
0.07 
Step 2: Estimate project emissions PEPS,p,y for low technology production facilities 
Emissions under the project scenario are determined using the following equation: 
 
𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑆,𝑝,𝑦= (𝑃𝐸𝐷,𝑝,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝑃,𝑝,𝑦+ 𝑃𝐸𝐶,𝑝,𝑦) ×
∑∑𝑀𝑡,𝑘,𝑝,𝑦
𝑘
𝑡
𝑀𝑝,𝑦
 
(7) 
Where:  
PEPS,p,y 
= Project emissions at the production stage at production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PED,p,y 
= Emissions associated with the pre-treatment of waste biomass at production 
facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PEP,p,y 
= Emissions associated with the conversion of waste biomass into biochar at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PED,p,y  
= Emissions due to the utilization of auxiliary energy for the purpose of pyrolysis at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
27 
Determining PED,p,y: Emissions associated with the pre-treatment of feedstock at production 
facility p in year y for low technology facilities 
Energy consumption for necessary pre-treatment of waste biomass must be accounted for. This 
may include feedstock preparation (e.g., feedstock agglomeration, homogenization, pelletizing) 
either inside the production facility or in field preparation, drying of wet biomass, or other 
processes. If the energy source is renewable, PED,p,y must be zero. Otherwise, it must be 
calculated as follows:  
𝑃𝐸𝐷,𝑝,𝑦 = 𝑃𝐸𝐷𝐸,𝑝,𝑦 + 𝑃𝐸𝐷𝐹,𝑝,𝑦 
(8) 
Where:  
PED,p,y 
= Emissions associated with pre-treatment of feedstock at production facility p in 
year y (tCO2e) 
PEDE,p,y 
= Emissions associated with grid-connected electricity utilized for pre-treatment of 
waste biomass at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). 𝑃𝐸𝐷𝐸,𝑝,𝑦 must be calculated 
as per the provisions of CDM TOOL05: Baseline, project and/or leakage emissions 
from electricity consumption and monitoring of electricity generation. 
PEDF,p,y 
= Emissions associated with combustion of fossil fuels utilized for pre-treatment of 
waste biomass at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). 𝑃𝐸𝐷𝐹,𝑝,𝑦 must be calculated 
as per the provisions of CDM TOOL03: Tool to calculate project or leakage CO2 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion. 
Determining PEP,p,y: Emissions associated with the thermochemical process at production facility 
p in year y for low technology facilities 
In the absence of direct emission measurements that can reliably measure and report project 
emissions, data from peer-reviewed literature must be used in the following equation: 
𝑃𝐸𝑃,𝑝,𝑦 = ∑∑(𝐹𝑒× 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 × 𝑀𝑡,𝑘,𝑝,𝑦)
𝑡
 
𝑘
 
(9) 
Where: 
PEP,p,y 
= Emissions associated with the conversion of waste biomass into biochar at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
Fe 
= Average methane emissions from producing one tonne of biochar in year y 
(tCH4/tonne). Values from Table 3 in Cornelissen et al. (2016)22 may be used 
based on the corresponding kiln type (i.e., low technology production facility type). 
Where the kiln type is not listed a default average emission factor of 0.049 t 
CH4/tonne may be conservatively used based on the value for traditional kilns 
 
22 Cornelissen, G., Pandit, N. R., Taylor, P., Pandit, B. H., Sparrevik, M., & Schmidt, H. P. (2016). Emissions and char 
quality of flame curtain “kon tiki” kilns for farmer-scale charcoal/biochar production. PLoS ONE, 11(5), e0154617. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0154617 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
28 
since simple low-cost technologies are known to emit higher levels of CH4.23 
Project proponent may propose more appropriate values based on scientific 
studies, research papers or any other credible documentation and/or information 
related to the utilized production technology.  
GWPCH4 
= Global warming potential of methane. Use value referenced in the latest version of 
the VCS Standard 
Mt,k,p,y 
= Mass on a dry weight basis of biochar type t and application type k produced at 
production facility p in year y (tonnes) 
Determining PEC,p,y: Emissions due to the utilization of auxiliary energy for the purpose of pyrolysis  
When external energy is required to initiate and maintain the pyrolysis reactor, it must be 
accounted as project emissions. If the source of auxiliary energy is renewable, PEC,p,y must be 
zero. Otherwise, it must be calculated as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝐶,𝑝,𝑦 = 𝑃𝐸𝐶𝐸,𝑝,𝑦 + 𝑃𝐸𝐶𝐹,𝑝,𝑦 
(10) 
Where:  
PEC,p,y 
= Emissions due to the utilization of auxiliary energy for the purpose of pyrolysis at 
production facility p in year y (tCO2e) 
PECE,p,y  
= Emissions associated with use of grid-connected electricity utilized for starting the 
reactor at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). PECE,p,y must be calculated as per 
CDM TOOL05: Baseline, project and/or leakage emissions from electricity 
consumption and monitoring of electricity generation. 
PECF,p,y 
= Emissions associated with combustion of fossil fuels utilized for starting the 
reactor at production facility p in year y (tCO2e). PECF,p,y must be calculated as per 
the provisions of CDM TOOL03: Tool to calculate project or leakage CO2 emissions 
from fossil fuel combustion. 
8.2.3 Application Stage 
In the project scenario, emissions associated with processing and utilizing biochar after its 
production will have a potential impact on the overall emission removal potential. Equation 11 
determines the GHG emissions at the application stage. 
𝑃𝐸𝐴𝑆,𝑦 = ∑∑(𝐸𝑃,𝑡,𝑘,𝑦+ 𝐸𝑎𝑝,𝑡,𝑘,𝑦)
𝑡
𝑘
 
(11) 
 
23 Woolf, D., Lehmann, J., Ogle, S., Kishimoto-Mo, A. W., McConkey, B., & Baldock, J. (2021). Greenhouse gas inventory 
model for biochar additions to soil. Environmental Science & Technology, 55(21), 14795-14805. 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
29 
Where: 
PEAS,y 
= GHG emissions at application stage in year y (tCO2e) 
EP,t,k,y 
= Emissions from processing of biochar type t for application type k in year y (tCO2e) 
Eap,t,k,y 
= Emissions from utilization of biochar type t for application type k in year y (tCO2e) 
Determining EP,k,y: Emissions associated with processing of biochar for application type k 
In a scenario where biochar undergoes further processing (e.g., sizing, grinding, sifting) before 
final soil or non-soil application, project proponents must quantify energy-related emissions 
associated with grinding and other mechanical treatment of biochar. This methodology does not 
account for emissions related to the production or generation of materials with which biochar is 
mixed/infused for non-soil application (e.g., biochar-amended concrete or biochar-amended 
asphalt).  
If the energy source is renewable, EP,k,y is not considered and the default value of zero must be 
used. Otherwise, it must be calculated as follows: 
𝐸𝑃,𝑘,𝑦 = 𝑃𝐸𝑃𝐸,𝑘,𝑦 + 𝑃𝐸𝑃𝐹,𝑘,𝑦 
(12) 
Where:  
EP,k,y 
= Emissions from processing of biochar for application type k in year y (tCO2e) 
PEPE,k,y 
= Emissions associated with grid-connected electricity utilized for processing biochar 
for application type k in year y (tCO2e). PEPE,k,y must be calculated as per the 
provisions of CDM TOOL05: Baseline, project and/or leakage emissions from 
electricity consumption and monitoring of electricity generation. 
PEPF,k,y 
= Emissions associated with combustion of fossil fuels utilized for processing of 
biochar for application type k in year y (tCO2e). PEPF,k,y must be calculated as per 
the provisions of CDM TOOL03: Tool to calculate project or leakage CO2 emissions 
from fossil fuel combustion. 
Where there is no processing of biochar, EP,k,y must be zero. 
Determining Eap,k,y: Emissions associated with utilization of biochar for application k 
Eap,k,y corresponds to emissions during the utilization of biochar for application type k in year y. 
GHG emissions resulting from fossil fuel combustion or mixing of biochar with fertilizer products 
are considered negligible. Thus, Eap,k,y is zero.24 
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
In the case of biochar use, leakage emissions are primarily attributed to transport emissions at 
various stages of the biochar life cycle. Emissions due to activity-shifting leakage or biomass 
 
24 As per CDM AR-ACM0003 Afforestation and reforestation of lands except wetlands. Available at 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/C9QS5G3CS8FW04MYYXDFOQDPXWM4OE 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
30 
diversion are considered zero, as currently only waste biomass is eligible for biochar 
production. Quantification of leakage emissions are as follows: 
𝐿𝐸𝑦 = 𝐿𝐸𝑎𝑠,𝑦+ 𝐿𝐸𝑏𝑑,𝑦+ 𝐿𝐸𝑡𝑠,𝑦+ 𝐿𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑝,𝑦 
(13) 
Where: 
LEy 
= Total leakage emissions in year y (tCO2e) 
LEas,y 
= Leakage due to activity shift in year y (tCO2e). Leakage due to activity shift is zero 
as use of purposely grown biomass for production of biochar is currently not 
allowed. 
LEbd,y 
= Leakage due to biomass diversion in year y (tCO2e). Leakage due to biomass 
(waste/residue) diversion is considered negligible since only biomass which would 
have been combusted or left to decay is utilized for biochar production. 
LEts,y 
= Leakage emissions from transportation of waste biomass from sourcing to biochar 
production facility in year y (tCO2e). As per CDM TOOL16: Project and leakage 
emissions from biomass,25 GHG emissions must be accounted for only if 
transportation distance is more than 200 km. Project proponent must use CDM 
TOOL12: Project and leakage emissions from transportation of freight26 to 
calculate LEts,y 
LEtap,y 
= Leakage emissions from transportation of biochar from the production facility to 
the site of end application in year y (tCO2e). As per CDM Tool 16: Project and 
leakage emissions from biomass, GHG emissions must be accounted for only if 
transportation distance is more than 200 km. Project proponent must use CDM 
TOOL12: Project and leakage emissions from transportation of freight to calculate 
LEtap,y. 
Determining LEts,y: Emissions related to leakage from transportation of waste biomass from 
sourcing to biochar production facility 
Project emissions from transportation of waste biomass from the place of origin to the biochar 
production site may have the following components: 
i. 
Transport emissions from field to the production facility 
LEts,y is considered zero if transportation distance (to and from—round trip) is less than 200 km. 
Project emissions from transportation of biochar must be calculated as per the latest version of 
CDM TOOL12: Project and leakage emissions from transportation of freight. 
Determining LEtap,y: Emissions related to leakage from transportation of biochar from production 
facility to site of end-use application 
Project emissions from transportation of biochar from facility to end-use application may have 
the following components:  
i) 
Transport emissions from biochar facility to processing facility; AND  
 
25 Available at https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-16-v4.pdf   
26 Available at https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-12-v1.1.0.pdf  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
31 
ii) Transport emissions from processing facility to end-use site; 
OR 
iii) Transport emissions from biochar facility to end-use site.  
LEtap,y is considered zero if transportation distance (to and from—round trip) is less than 200 
km. Project emissions from transportation of biochar must be calculated as per the latest 
version of CDM TOOL12: Project and leakage emissions from transportation of freight. 
8.4 
Reversal Risk Mitigation 
After the production of biochar, there exist sources of risk that could lead to reversals, i.e., loss 
of sequestered carbon in the biochar that has previously been verified. Prior to use in soil or 
non-soil applications, the produced biochar may be intentionally combusted for use as a fuel 
source. This risk is wholly mitigated by the requirement that biochar is used only in approved 
soil or non-soil applications (as per applicability conditions 5 and 7) with required end-use 
application monitoring (see Section 9.3). During and after use in soil or non-soil applications, 
there exist various natural and non-natural reversal risks which are mitigated in this 
methodology as discussed in the following sections.  
8.4.1 Natural Risks 
When biochar is utilized for soil applications, natural risks are associated with climatic and 
geological factors such as fires, floods, wind, and precipitation, among others. Of these, fire 
represents the most significant risk by far since it can result in the immediate loss of 
sequestered carbon due to the combustion of biochar. On the other hand, erosion by wind or 
water (flooding) poses the risk of transport of biochar outside of the project boundary and 
beyond the control of the project proponent. 
All of these natural risks are substantially mitigated through the incorporation of the biochar 
into the soil subsurface, ideally to a minimum of 10 cm depth. However, projects may also apply 
biochar on the soil surface. In this case, the risk of loss due to fire or erosion (wind or water) is 
heightened since the biochar remains exposed on the soil surface. Risks can be mitigated by 
mixing biochar with other amendments such as manures and composts prior to surface 
application which reduces biochar’s combustibility and erodibility (IBI, 2010). Hence, for 
surface application biochar must be mixed with other substrates according to applicability 
condition 5. With these mitigation approaches, risks of losses for soil applications are greatly 
reduced as substantiated by the scientific literature:  
• 
Loss due to combustion: The nature of changes in soil during and after fires depends 
on both the temperatures reached at different soil depths and the degree of heating 
that the different soil components may withstand before being altered (González-Pérez 
et al., 2004). Temperatures during fires decrease dramatically with soil depth (Enninful 
& Torvi, 2008) and most loss of soil organic matter during wildfires is limited to the very 
top layer of soil (Boerner, 2009; Majder-Łopatka, 2019). Except for high-intensity 
wildfires in forest settings, the heat generated during a fire does not typically combust 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
32 
the organic matter in soils, particularly in agricultural settings. Furthermore, with 
subsoil application, studies have shown that biochar increases the resilience of the soil 
to different abiotic and biotic stressors. For example, application of biochar increases 
the water retention capacity of the soil (Głąb et al., 2016), thus itself acting as a risk 
mitigation against loss due to combustion. Thus, when biochar is applied into the soil 
subsurface the risk of its combustion decreases significantly, and when applied in 
combination with amendments to the soil surface its combustibility is further reduced 
(IBI, 2010).  
• 
Loss due to transport outside the project boundary: Studies have shown that when 
biochar is applied into soils, it may reduce water runoff and overall soil erosion 
(Gholami et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2015) and thus transport of biochar outside the 
project boundary. Similarly, risk of wind erosion is greatly reduced by incorporating 
biochar into the subsurface of soil. Even so, some biochar could still be transported 
outside the project boundary due to erosion, but this does not directly imply that the 
sequestered carbon in the biochar will be lost to the atmosphere. Rather, biochar may 
be transported via overland flow or wind into waterways and eventually deposited into 
sediments where it is likely to persist for as long as or longer than the soil where it was 
originally applied.  
When biochar is used for non-soil applications natural risks are considered minimal. Lee et al. 
(2019) have shown that when biochar is used in bio-composites such as those with inorganic 
clay, biochar reduces thermal conductivity, thus increasing the thermal resistance of the 
material to combustion. When biochar is incorporated into building materials such as mineral 
plasters, gypsum, or clay, the material is not prone to incineration; rather the biochar is 
protected against biological and chemical decay (Gupta & Kua, 2019). For this reason, other 
established biochar accounting programs (i.e., EBC) indicate that when biochar is incorporated 
into building materials such as concrete, lime plaster, gypsum or clay, combustion is nearly 
impossible (EBC, 2021).   
8.4.2 Non-Natural Risks  
Non-natural risks are those associated with project management, financial viability (for 
example, insufficient funds to complete the project cycle), government policies, or community 
and stakeholder resistance, among others.  
• 
Social risks (i.e., community resistance or non-acceptability) are considered minimal 
since the methodology considers only waste biomass as an eligible feedstock for biochar 
production. Therefore, competing uses for feedstock will not exist and communities may 
be expected to find new livelihood and revenue stream opportunities from the 
introduction of biochar projects.  
• 
Project management and financial risks are considered minimal due to the 
independence of annual removals achieved from project activities. It is possible that the 
project proponent may go bankrupt at some point after verification and issuance of 
carbon credits, or a project proponent may terminate the project before the end of the 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
33 
crediting period. In that event, non-natural risk due to project and financial viability are 
considered to have a minimal impact on project claims from the previous year because 
once utilized at the application stage (soil or non-soil applications), biochar will remain as 
a sequestered material. For example, biochar applied to agricultural soils will continue to 
act as a carbon sink irrespective of the fate of the project and/or continuation of biochar 
application in the case of project proponent bankruptcy. In the case of a non-soil 
application (e.g., biochar infused in cement), the carbon sink function will continue 
irrespective of activities in subsequent years (Akinyemi & Adesina, 2020). GHG benefits 
associated with biochar applied in year one of the project are not dependent on 
continuation of application of biochar in year two. 
Given the mitigation measures for natural and non-natural risks in both soil and non-soil 
applications described above, this methodology considers reversal risk of verified biochar 
carbon sequestration negligible.  
8.5 
Net Reductions and Removals 
Emission reductions at the sourcing stage are calculated as follows: 
𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑆,𝑦 = 𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑦−𝑃𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑦 
(14) 
Where: 
ERSS,y 
= GHG emission reductions at sourcing stage in year y (tCO2e) 
BESS,y 
= Baseline emissions at sourcing stage in year y; conservatively assumed default 
value of zero (tCO2e) 
PESS,y 
= Project emissions at sourcing stage in year y, conservatively assumed to be zero 
(waste biogenic source material is considered as renewable biomass) (tCO2e) 
Net GHG emission reductions and removals are calculated as follows: 
𝐸𝑅𝑦 = 𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑆,𝑦+ 𝐸𝑅𝑃𝑆,𝑦 − 𝑃𝐸𝐴𝑆,𝑦− 𝐿𝐸𝑦 
(15) 
Where: 
ERy 
= Net GHG emissions reductions and removals in year y (tCO2e) 
ERSS,y  
= GHG emission reductions at sourcing stage in year y (tCO2e) 
ERPS,y 
= GHG emission removals at production stage in year y (tCO2e) 
PEAS,y 
= GHG emissions at application stage in year y (tCO2e) 
LEy 
= Total leakage emissions in year y (tCO2e) 
 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
34