3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions document, the following 
definitions apply to this methodology. 
Anaerobic decomposition 
The microbial breakdown of organic material in the absence of oxygen. Organic compounds 
emitted during anaerobic decomposition are mainly methane (CH4) and lesser amounts of 
carbon dioxide (CO2). Examples of anaerobic decomposition include marine mud sediments 
and manure ponds. 
Biochar 
A solid and stabilized carbon material formed by the thermochemical processing of biomass in 
an oxygen-limited environment. These processes can be classified as either pyrolysis (in which 
oxidants are excluded), or gasification (in which oxidant concentrations are low enough to 
generate syngas). Both processes are considered interchangeably in this document. Biochar is 
considered a carbon sink when its soil applications (e.g., soil amendment on agricultural lands) 
or non-soil applications (e.g., cement, asphalt) can prove carbon-persistent over time.  
Biogenic 
A material that is produced by or originates from a living organism. 
Chain of custody 
The process by which inputs and outputs and associated information are transferred, monitored 
and controlled as they move through each step in the relevant supply chain. For biochar 
projects, the chain of custody refers to tracking and documentation from the sourcing stage 
(i.e., waste biomass) until the application stage (i.e., biochar use in soil or non-soil 
applications).  
Dry weight basis 
A measure of how much water is in a solid, expressed as the weight of water as a percentage of 
the completely dry solid. Procedures to determine biochar on a dry weight basis are outlined in 
International Biochar Initiative (IBI) Standardized Product Definition and Product Testing 
Guidelines for Biochar That Is Used in Soil (hereinafter referred to as the IBI Biochar Testing 
Guidelines)1 which uses ASTM D1762-84 Standard Test Method for Chemical Analysis of Wood 
Charcoal to determine dry weight of biochar products (see Table 1, page 13 of the IBI Biochar 
Testing Guidelines). In cases where moisture content of feedstocks is required, ASTM D4442-
20 Standard Test Methods for Direct Moisture Content Measurement of Wood and Wood-Based 
Materials can be used as a guide. The method involves drying samples to a constant weight in 
a ventilated oven at 102 to 105 °C. 
 
1 Available at https://biochar-international.org/standard-certification-training/biochar-standards/.  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
7 
Feedstocks 
The materials undergoing thermochemical processes to create biochar. Feedstock materials 
must be biogenic to qualify under this methodology and must comply with the applicability 
conditions (see Section 4). 
Freight 
The goods and materials (including waste materials) that are transported. Freight 
transportation under this methodology refers to trips for transporting waste biomass or biochar 
products. Transportation shall be grouped together as that using the same vehicle class and 
transporting freight between the same origin and destination. 
Gasification 
A technological process that converts carbon-based raw material into fuel gas. Gasification 
occurs in a gasifier, generally at temperatures greater than700 °C.  
High-carbon fly ash from biomass 
A by-product of biomass-based energy production, whereby the by-product is usually reinjected 
into the process. High-carbon fly ash (HCFA) from biomass is typically produced using boiler 
systems at lumber and other forestry-related facilities. The main components are ash and 
carbonized material.  
Biomass ash, and fractions thereof, include bottom ash and fly ash. Some of these fractions 
may display physicochemical properties that are similar to biochar materials, including high 
organic carbon content fractions termed “high-carbon fly ash” (adapted from IBI Biochar Testing 
Guidelines Section 5.8, page 21). 
High technology production facility  
High technology production facilities are those that meet all of the following conditions based 
on the European Biochar Certificate – EBC Guidelines for Sustainable Production of Biochar2 
(hereinafter referred to as the EBC Production Guidelines): (a) the pyrolytic greenhouse gases 
produced during pyrolysis must be recovered or combusted—greenhouse gases are not allowed 
to escape into the atmosphere; (b) at least 70 percent of the heat energy produced by pyrolysis 
must be used3 (taking into consideration heat transfer inefficiencies) to ensure that energy is 
recovered as well as biochar;4 (c) pollution controls such as a thermal oxidizer or other 
emissions controls are present that meet local, national or international emission thresholds;5 
and (d) production temperature is measured and reported. If any of these conditions are not 
met, the facility is categorized as a low technology production facility. 
Long-lived biochar products 
The carbon storage from non-soil biochar application where the project proponent can prove 
that the average life is the average number of years a product is in use, with evidence from 
 
2 Available at https://www.european-biochar.org/en/ct/2-EBC-guidelines-documents.  
3 The 70% value is adapted from the EBC Production Guidelines. 
4 As an example, proof of this energy utilization requirement shall be demonstrated by calculating the lower heating 
value of the feedstock and the amount of biochar produced (adapted from the EBC Production Guidelines). 
5 In case of overlapping standards, the strictest regulations shall be fulfilled. 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
8 
peer-reviewed literature. Project proponent must demonstrate that the biochar in non-soil 
applications is not combusted at the end of life of the product in which the biochar is utilized. 
Low technology production facility 
Low technology production facilities are those that do not meet all the conditions given under 
the definition of high technology production facility. 
Non-soil applications 
Use of biochar for other applications besides soil, for example as an additive in long-lasting 
products like concrete and asphalt or any other application with demonstrated long-term use 
and persistence. Biochar must be at least 50 percent carbon by dry weight basis to be used for 
non-soil applications (e.g., some activated carbon, due to excessive fossil fuel input, results in a 
loss of more than 50 percent of the original biochar carbon material and therefore would not be 
eligible).6  
Organic carbon content  
The amount of organic carbon permanently stored in the biochar as a mass proportion (in 
percent) based on the biochar dry weight.  
Overstocked forest 
The condition of having so many stems for a species and size that severe competition for 
growth resources has reduced growth, stressed trees, and put them at risk of insect, disease, 
or wildfire mortality (Helms, 1998). 
Pyrolysis 
The thermochemical decomposition of biogenic material or compounds under inert conditions 
in an oxygen-deficient environment (oxidants are excluded).  
Waste biomass 
The biomass, by-products, residues, and waste streams from agriculture, forestry and related 
industries, recycling economy, animal manure, and all others listed in Table 1. Any biomass 
residues meeting the feedstock requirements included in this methodology are eligible for 
biochar production and must comply with any required sustainable feedstock criteria (see 
Section 4).