1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION 
Additionality and Crediting Method 
Additionality 
Activity Method 
Crediting Baseline 
Project Method 
 
This globally applicable methodology provides criteria and procedures for the quantification of 
GHG benefits following the adoption of improved waste handling and disposal (WHD) of waste 
biomass. The project activity consists of three parts: 1) sourcing waste biomass, 2) producing 
biochar, and 3) utilizing biochar in soil or non-soil application.  
The project activity must install and operate a new (greenfield) biochar production facility(ies) 
where GHG benefits are credited only for the biochar that is utilized in the eligible soil and non-
soil applications. The start date of the project is defined as the first instance of biochar 
production. 
The baseline scenario is the continuation of pre-project WHD where the waste biomass would 
either be left to decay or be combusted for purposes other than energy. This methodology 
applies the most conservative and operational approach by not considering emission 
reductions from changing the WHD practices at the sourcing stage. Thereby, the default net 
GHG emissions in the baseline scenario at the sourcing stage are considered zero (the most 
conservative assumption).  
This methodology uses a standardized approach for the demonstration of additionality, 
following an activity method with the processing of waste biomass to biochar as the basis for a 
positive list. This approach stipulates that the total mass of waste biomass converted to biochar 
amounts to five percent or less of the total mass of waste biomass available worldwide. 
The methodology employs a comprehensive monitoring and accounting framework that 
captures the GHG impacts in the three important stages of a biochar value chain: sourcing, 
production, and application (i.e., the use of biochar in soil or non-soil applications). The 
methodology also includes a section to address permanence of biochar, including decay rate 
and reversal risk from natural and non-natural risks (see Section 8.4). 
Monitoring must be conducted for both the baseline and project scenarios. For emissions 
associated with the production stage, calculations are based on one or more monitored biochar 
production variables according to the parameters described (e.g., production temperature and 
biochar material properties), or use default values detailed in the methodology, according to 
the type of production technology. Eligible projects must document and prove the final 
application of biochar (see Section 9).  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
5