4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
The project activity must install and operate a new (greenfield) biochar production facility(ies) 
where the project proponent must 1) source waste biomass, 2) produce biochar and 3) ensure 
the biochar is utilized in soil or non-soil application. GHG benefits are credited only for the 
biochar that is utilized in the eligible soil and non-soil applications.  
 
 
6 Charcoal use is excluded. The rationale for the 50 percent requirement is to avoid erasing the sequestration benefits 
of biochar during upgrading the material to other non-soil uses. 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
9 
Further, the project activities must meet the following conditions. 
Technological scope  
1) The methodology is applicable when biochar is produced from eligible waste biomass 
through a thermochemical process such as pyrolysis, gasification, and biomass boilers7 
and the biochar is subsequently applied to an end-use (soil or non-soil applications). 
Torrefaction and hydrothermal carbonization as processes of biochar production are 
excluded8 from this methodology.  
2) The methodology is applicable to projects using either low or high technology production 
facilities to produce biochar, as per the definitions of each provided in Section 3 of this 
methodology.  
3) The biochar producers must have a health and safety program to protect workers from 
airborne pollutants and other hazards.  
Eligible feedstocks and production 
4) The feedstock used to produce biochar must meet all following conditions to be eligible: 
a) Feedstock must be purely biogenic waste biomass and not purpose-grown, 
b) Feedstock must have been otherwise left to decay or combusted for purposes 
other than energy production. Additional guidance on how to demonstrate fate of 
waste biomass in the absence of the project activity is provided in Appendix 2, 
c) Feedstock must not have been imported from other countries9, and 
d) Feedstock must meet the sustainability conditions provided in Table 1. This table 
is not an exhaustive list of waste biomass examples.  
 
Table 1 describes the categories of feedstock sourcing, the sustainability criteria that must be 
met for each feedstock source, and a non-exhaustive list of examples of feedstocks eligible 
under this methodology.      
Table 1. List of eligible feedstocks for biochar production 
Feedstock Sourcing 
Categories 
Sustainability Criteria 
Waste Biomass Examples 
(Not Exhaustive) 
Agricultural waste 
biomass 
a) 
Where project proponents are using 
agricultural waste biomass directly 
from fields and not from a 
a) 
Tree, vine, and shrub 
pruning 
 
7 For the purpose of this methodology, the terms pyrolysis, gasification, and biomass boilers are used interchangeably. 
8 Both processes are excluded because they do not generate solid products that are significantly more persistent in soil 
than the original feedstock (Woolf et al., 2021). 
9 The methodology discourages transportation of waste biomass over long distances, especially among countries and 
between continents.  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
10 
centralized biomass-processing 
operation (e.g., food processing 
facilities), project proponents must 
provide documentation that the 
project activity is not leading to a 
decline in soil carbon stocks or a 
reduction in crop productivity, or 
that in the baseline agriculture 
waste biomass was burned without 
energy production (e.g., open 
burning of stubble).  
b) 
In the absence of documentation, 
feedstock removal is limited to no 
more than 50 percent of total 
residues to protect against soil 
degradation (Andrew, 2006; 
Battaglia et al., 2020).  
b) 
Harvest residues such 
as straw, leaves, stalks, 
husk, pomace, kernels 
c) 
Fruit and vegetable 
residues 
Food processing 
residues  
a) 
Residues must be from food 
processing facilities.  
b) 
Production of residues per output of 
the facility must not have increased 
to be used specifically for the 
purpose of production of biochar.  
a) 
Material from washing, 
cleaning, peeling, 
centrifugation, and 
separation processes 
b) 
Expired food residues 
c) 
Residues from 
processing in the food 
industry (e.g., coffee, 
tea, cocoa, tobacco) 
Forestry and other 
wood processing 
a) 
Wood-based feedstock sources 
coming from forest (as opposed to 
by-products of mill processing) must 
prove that biomass comes from 
sustainable sources and does not 
lead to deforestation or degradation. 
Examples of proof of sustainable 
use include sustainable 
management plans approved by a 
relevant state or regional authority, 
forestry certification such as the 
Programme for the Endorsement of 
Forest Certification (PEFC) or Forest 
Stewardship Council (FSC), or 
meeting the requirements of 
a) 
Off-cuts, sawdust, and 
other material 
produced as a by-
product of forest 
management or 
harvesting operations 
b) 
Any by-product from 
forest-based industries 
such as wood pallets 
and wood waste11 
c) 
Thinnings generated 
from forest wildfire fuel 
reduction activities or 
areas designated by 
state, provincial, or 
federal authorities as 
 
11 More details on biomass waste products can be found in Tripathi, N., Hills, C. D., Singh, R. S., & Atkinson, C J. (2019). 
Biomass waste utilization in low-carbon products: Harnessing a major potential resource. npj Climate and Atmospheric 
Science, 2, 35. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41612-019-0093-5 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
11 
renewable biomass as defined by 
the CDM (EB23 Annex 18).10  
b) 
When processed timber is used as 
feedstock for soil applications, it 
must not, for health and safety 
reasons, contain any paint residues, 
solvents or other contaminants 
including any potentially toxic 
impurities (EBC, 2022; Hedley et al., 
2020). 
overstocked 
d) 
Material from pruning 
or thinning of woody 
vegetation (not 
including merchantable 
timber) such as shade 
trees, orchards, 
windbreaks, stream 
buffers, silvopasture, or 
invasive removal on 
rangeland 
e) 
Diseased trees felled 
during plantation or 
woodland management 
f) 
Burned woody biomass 
g) 
Wastepaper and 
cardboards 
Recycling economy 
a) 
Feedstocks must comply with 
relevant thresholds for heavy metals 
and other contaminants as outlined 
in the latest version of the material 
standards or guidelines relevant for 
the project context (i.e., IBI Biochar 
Testing Guidelines or EBC 
Production Guidelines). The biomass 
is the non-fossil fraction of industrial 
or municipal waste (CDM EB23 
Annex 18). 
a) 
Urban/rural green 
cuttings, non-
hazardous municipal 
green waste 
b) 
Biosolids from 
wastewater treatment 
c) 
Paper mill sludge 
Aquaculture plants 
a) 
Waste must be by-products of 
aquaculture. 
b) 
Project proponents must be 
demonstrated that waste invasive 
species such as water hyacinth 
(Eichhornia crassipes) were not 
purposely introduced in order to 
qualify as feedstock for biochar 
production. 
a) 
Seaweed, algae waste 
products, aquatic 
invasive species 
(Plantae kingdom only) 
Animal manure 
a) 
Waste must be by-products of 
animal husbandry 
a) 
Waste from swine, 
cattle, horse, and 
poultry farms 
 
10 Available at https://cdm.unfccc.int/EB/023/eb23_repan18.pdf  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
12 
High-carbon fly ash 
from biomass 
a) 
HCFA must be no more than 5 
percent of the annual waste 
biomass throughput from the 
bioenergy facility. 
b) 
Project proponents must also 
provide information that an 
“affirmative” technology12 was used 
to extract biochar prior to complete 
combustion of the waste biomass 
stream.  
c) 
Project proponents must further 
demonstrate that the biomass 
facilities did not use fossil fuel 
sources to replace the loss of 
biomass caloric value when material 
was diverted to the biochar project. 
d) 
The final material meets the IBI 
Biochar Testing Guidelines13. 
a) 
By-products of 
cogeneration facilities 
5) Biochar made from a single or mixed eligible feedstock must comply with the latest 
version of the IBI Biochar Testing Guidelines or the EBC Production Guidelines.  
6) The waste biomass used as feedstock to produce biochar and the resulting biochar to 
be utilized in soil or non-soil applications may be transported via ships, boats, and 
vehicles other than road transportation up to a distance of 200 km. However, it must 
only be transported by vehicles (i.e., road transportation) for distances more than 200 
km as defined under CDM TOOL12: Project and leakage emissions from transportation 
of freight.  
7) Mineral additives such as lime, rock minerals, and ash may comprise up to 10 percent 
of the mass when added. If the addition exceeds 10 percent on a dry weight basis, the 
biochar producer must present laboratory tests indicating that the final product meets 
IBI Biochar Testing Guidelines or EBC Production Guidelines thresholds for organic and 
inorganic contaminants. 
8) Other evidence that may be used to demonstrate compliance with waste biomass 
sustainability criterion are biomass certification schemes such as the Roundtable on 
Sustainable Biomaterials (RSB), International Sustainability and Carbon Certification 
(ISCC) or any other certification scheme approved and/or endorsed by a relevant 
 
12 Affirmative technologies refer to diversion of “re-injection” HCFA that is removed from the combustion stream (for 
biochar harvesting purposes) instead of allowing complete combustion of the biomass feedstocks during a second pass 
through the boiler. 
13 Section 5.8 of the IBI Biochar Standard v2.1. Available at https://biochar-international.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/IBI_Biochar_Standards_V2.1_Final2.pdf  
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
13 
legislative body or international body such as the European Union,14 CORSIA,15 and 
national/state governments. 
Eligible biochar end-use application criteria 
9) Biochar is eligible to be utilized and accounted for under the methodology if it is being 
utilized within one year of its production. Biochar is subject to natural decay and the 
permanence of biochar is calculated for a period of 100 years. To adhere to the decay 
factor established for 100 years and prevent any decay before application, biochar must 
be utilized in soil or non-soil applications within the first year of its production. 
10) Biochar is eligible to be used as a soil amendment on land other than wetlands. Eligible 
land types include cropland, grassland, vegetated urban soils, and forest. Biochar is 
eligible to be applied either to the soil surface or subsurface. For surface application, 
the biochar must be mixed with other substrates such as compost, manure or digestate 
from anaerobic digestion. For subsurface application, the biochar may be applied either 
as a unique soil amendment or mixed with other substrates. For any soil application, 
the biochar must: 
a) comply with biochar material standards to avoid the risk of transferring unwanted 
heavy metals and organic contaminants to soil. Project proponents must meet 
the IBI Biochar Testing Guidelines or EBC Production Guidelines,16 or relevant 
national regulations for avoiding soil contamination. 
b) have a hydrogen to organic carbon molar ratio (H:Corg) of less than or equal to 0.7. 
11) Biochar is eligible to be used in non-soil applications including but not limited to 
cement, asphalt, and any other applications where long-term storage of the biochar is 
possible. Only biochar produced in high technology production facilities, as defined 
under the methodology, is eligible to be used in non-soil applications. 
12) Project proponents must demonstrate that biochar and/or final products are long-lived 
via credible evidence such as laboratory results, peer reviewed research papers or any 
other third party-evaluated product assessment, such as decay rate analysis, as 
applicable. The information provided must include the lifetime of the product in which 
biochar is stored long term. The resultant product must be compliant with 
 
14 Annex IX Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the European Council of 11 December 2018 
on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources. In particular, Annex IV sets out the minimum 
requirements for certifying waste and residues, grouped in the following categories (Annex IX): food-feed processing 
residues and waste; agricultural/forestry residues and waste; landscape care biomass; animal residues and waste; 
wastewater and derivatives; fats, oil and greases; others. 
15 The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) under its Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for 
International Aviation (CORSIA) approves certification schemes for eligible biofuels produced from eligible biomass, to 
be used in international aviation as part of emissions reduction targets of the international aviation industry. Waste 
biomass may be certified using the schemes approved by CORSIA.  
16 Available at https://www.european-biochar.org/media/doc/2/version_en_9_4.pdf 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
14 
national/international product quality standards/specifications as applicable (e.g., the 
American Concrete Institute Standards in the US). 
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
13) The methodology must not be applied if biochar is used for energy purposes, burned as 
a fuel (e.g., as a substitute for charcoal or coke) or used in other soil or non-soil 
applications where biochar cannot be demonstrated to be a long-lived and persistent 
carbon sink.  
14) Biochar must not be used in applications in which substantial amounts of the biochar 
are oxidized (e.g., burned or used as a reduction agent in steel production, processed 
into activated carbon, or other uses that are fossil fuel-intensive). 
15) Non-soil applications are ineligible under the methodology if there is a loss of more 
than 50 percent of the carbon measured by dry weight basis (e.g., some activated 
carbon, due to excessive fossil fuel input, results in a loss of more than 50 percent of 
the original biochar carbon material and therefore would not be eligible).