7 ADDITIONALITY 
The methodology uses a standardized approach for the demonstration of additionality, 
specifically an activity method, combined with an investment analysis. Project activities that are 
on the positive list are automatically deemed as additional provided they also demonstrate 
regulatory surplus and investment barriers as described below. The processing of waste 
biomass to biochar is the basis for a positive list in this methodology.  
Project proponents applying this methodology must determine additionality using the procedure 
below. 
Step 1: Regulatory Surplus 
The project proponent must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent version of the VCS 
Standard and VCS Methodology Requirements.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus for the project activity, proceed 
to the next step (positive list). Otherwise, the project activity is not additional. 
Step 2: Positive List 
The applicability conditions of this methodology represent the positive list. The project 
proponent must demonstrate that it meets all of the applicability conditions, and in so doing, it 
is deemed to comply with the positive list. The positive list was established using the activity 
penetration option (Option A in the VCS Methodology Requirements). The justification for the 
activity method and step-by-step explanation is provided in Appendix 1. 
 
VM0044, v1.2 
 
18 
Where the project proponent demonstrates that the project activity meets all conditions of the 
positive list, proceed to the next step (investment analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not 
additional. 
Step 3: Investment Analysis  
Project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of the most recent version of 
VCS tool VT0008 Additionality Assessment to conduct an investment analysis (Step 3) through 
either an investment comparison analysis (Option 1) or benchmark analysis (Option 2).  
Where the project proponent demonstrates that all conditions of the investment analysis per 
VT0008 are met, the proposed project activity is additional. Otherwise, the project activity is not 
additional and is not eligible for crediting.