8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
Baseline emissions are calculated using a baseline emission factor for each vehicle category i 
using fuel type x or electricity in period y, BEFi,x,y and BEFi,elec,y. This factor represents the 
specific fuel consumption (SFCBL,i,x,y) or specific electricity consumption (SECBL,i,y) per activity 
level (ALi,x,y).  
The activity level reflects the operational usage or output of the vehicle, such as kilometers 
traveled, kilowatt-hours consumed, tonnes transported, or hours of operation. Specific 
fuel/electricity consumption is measured in a fuel metric per activity level (e.g., liters per 
kilometer, liters per tonne, kilowatt-hours per kilometer, kilowatt-hours per tonne). 
Baseline emissions are calculated by multiplying the baseline emission factors by the 
corresponding activity level of each project group vehicle category i: 
𝐵𝐸𝑦= ∑𝐵𝐸𝐹𝑖,𝑥,𝑦× 𝐴𝐿𝑖,𝑥,𝑦× 10−6
𝑖,𝑥
 
(1) 
Where:  
BEy 
= 
Baseline emissions in period y (t CO2) 
BEFi,x,y 
= 
Baseline emission factor of vehicle category i using fuel type x or 
electricity in period y (g CO2/activity level) 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
11 
ALi,x,y 
= 
Activity level of project group vehicle category i using fuel type x or 
electricity in period y (activity level) 
For vehicles using fuel (with or without telematics), the baseline emission factor is determined 
using the following equation: 
𝐵𝐸𝐹𝑖,𝑥,𝑦= 𝑆𝐹𝐶𝐵𝐿,𝑖,𝑥,𝑦× 𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑥,𝑦  
(2) 
Where:  
SFCBL,i,x,y 
= 
Specific baseline fuel consumption of vehicle category i using fuel type x 
in period y (fuel metric/activity level) 
EFCO2,x,y 
= 
CO2 emission factor for fuel type x in period y (g CO2/fuel metric) 
For vehicles using electricity (with or without telematics), the baseline emission factor is 
determined as follows: 
𝐵𝐸𝐹𝑖,𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑦= 𝑆𝐸𝐶𝐵𝐿,𝑖,𝑦× 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑦× (1 + 𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑦)  
(3) 
Where:  
BEFi,elec,y 
= 
Baseline emission factor of vehicle category i using electricity in period y 
(g CO2/activity level) 
SECBL,i,y 
= 
Specific baseline electricity consumption of vehicle category i in period y 
(kWh/activity level) 
EFelec,y 
= 
CO2 emission factor of electricity in period y (g CO2/kWh) 
TDLy 
= 
Average technical transmission and distribution losses for providing electricity 
in period y (%) 
In cases where mobile machinery uses both electricity and fossil fuels, emissions from both 
sources are summed. Where biofuel blends are used, the biofuel share is treated as zero-
emitting. 
8.1.1 Specific Baseline Fuel and Electricity Consumptions 
The specific baseline fuel consumption (SFCBL,i,x,y) and the specific baseline electricity 
consumption (SECBL,i,y) are determined using one of the following methods: 
1) For vehicles equipped with telematics systems, historical fuel and electricity 
consumption and activity level are used. 
2) For vehicles without telematics systems, values are based on the monitored fuel and 
electricity consumption and activity level of a control group. 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
12 
8.1.1.1 Option 1: Telematics Systems 
For vehicle types using telematics systems, specific baseline fuel/electricity consumptions and 
activity level must be determined using the vehicle’s own data prior to implementation of the 
project activity by applying one of the following options: 
1) Monitoring the fuel/electricity consumption and activity level of all project vehicles for 
a minimum of 5000 km or 200 hours3 of vehicle operation before implementation of 
the energy efficiency measures. 
2) Monitoring fuel/electricity consumption and activity level for a sample of project 
vehicles before implementation of the energy efficiency measures. The sampling must 
achieve at least 90/5 confidence/precision following the most recent versions of the 
CDM’s Standard: Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and Programmes of 
Activities and Guidelines: Sampling and Surveys for CDM Project Activities and 
Programmes of Activities. 
The project proponent must demonstrate that the fuel type, driving terrain (e.g., percentage of 
city driving compared to highway driving), operational characteristics, and applications (e.g., 
crane loads) of the baseline measurements are comparable to the project scenario or are 
conservative. 
8.1.1.2 Option 2: Control Group  
Control group vehicles must be selected from the vehicle fleets of the project proponent or from 
third-party fleets. A control group must be established for each vehicle category that uses this 
option and that belongs to the same fleet. 
The specific baseline fuel/electricity consumptions and activity level are monitored within the 
control group and project group of vehicles. 
To avoid crediting GHG emission reductions to the project that are due to external factors, the 
specific baseline fuel/electricity consumptions must be based on comparable vehicles driving 
in comparable situations. This may be based on a project control group that complies with the 
following conditions to ensure the control group is comparable to the project group: 
1) For buses, passenger cars, taxis, and jeepneys: 
a) Control group vehicles must be of the same age or younger on average than the 
project group vehicles. 
b) Control group vehicles must be used in the same area of usage on average as the 
project vehicles. 
c) Control group vehicles must have the same or a lower passenger capacity on 
average than the project vehicles. 
 
3 Based on approximately 5% of annual travel for an average class 8 vehicle in North America from US 
Department of Energy data available at: https://afdc.energy.gov/data/10309 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
13 
d) The share of vehicles with air conditioning in the control group must be the same or 
lower than that in the project group. 
2) For trucks:  
a) The average GVW of control group vehicles must be the same as or greater than 
that of project group vehicles. 
b) The average annual distance driven by control group vehicles must be the same as 
or greater than that driven by project group vehicles. 
c) The share of inter-urban trips made by control group vehicles must be on average 
equal to or higher than that made by project group vehicles. 
3) For mobile machinery: 
a) Mobile machinery in both groups must have a comparable power rating with 
variations of not more than ±20%. 
b) Control group mobile machinery must be of the same age or younger on average 
than project group mobile machinery. 
c) Control group mobile machinery can be used to produce the same product or 
perform the same activity as project group mobile machinery and operates in 
similar conditions (e.g., geography, temperature, sloping, idling). 
The project proponent must demonstrate that the control group is comparable to the project 
group and leads to conservative baseline estimations. 
8.1.2 Activity Level  
The activity level must be established in the project description and meet the following criteria: 
1) The activity level metric must be measurable with an acceptable level of certainty 
(acceptable data precision is ±5% with 90% confidence). 
2) Changes in the relationship between fuel usage and activity level must be related to 
improvements in efficiency or changes in the type of fuel used. These changes should 
not result from exogenous factors that are not associated with the project activity. To 
prove this relationship, data used to determine the baseline emission factor must show 
a deviation of less than 20% from the mean value at the lower boundary of the 90% 
confidence interval. If this deviation exceeds 20%, more homogenous subgroups of 
vehicles must be established. 
At validation, the project proponent must demonstrate that the activity level metric is 
appropriate to the project, and provide a qualitative analysis or ex-ante data to demonstrate 
that changes in fuel consumption are directly linked to efficiency improvements.  
At verification, the project proponent must demonstrate that changes in fuel consumption are 
directly linked to efficiency improvements by conducting the 20% deviation check within the 
90% confidence interval, as described above. 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
14 
8.1.3 Net Zero Transition 
To align with net zero goals, the project proponent must apply the requirements in Sections 
8.1.3.1 and 8.1.3.2. Additional background is provided in Appendix 2. 
8.1.3.1 Exclusion of New Fossil Fuel Vehicles 
From 1 January 2035, no new fossil fuel vehicles may be added to the project vehicle 
fleets. Where the host country or region has an earlier phase-out date specified in its net zero 
transition plan or equivalent policy, this earlier date must be applied. 
8.1.3.2 Net Zero Alignment 
Projects must align with the net zero transition plans and decarbonization strategies of the host 
country and region. This includes adherence to targets related to vehicle fleet emissions, 
composition, technologies, fuels, and other relevant targets related to GHG emissions set forth 
in these plans. 
The project proponent must monitor and report the net zero targets relevant to the project 
fleets and adjust the baseline emissions to reflect the targets for reducing fossil fuel 
consumption and GHG emissions, starting from the date on which these targets become 
effective. Both binding and non-binding targets must be considered when adjusting baseline 
emissions.  
The project proponent must explain in the monitoring reports how the baseline emission 
adjustments are made, demonstrate how these adjustments align with the applicable net zero 
targets, and ensure that they are conservative. 
The following guiding examples outline how baseline emissions could be adjusted to reflect net 
zero targets: 
• 
Example 1: Transition all light-duty and passenger vehicles to fully electric vehicles 
(EVs) by 2035. 
Guidance: From 2035 onwards, replace the baseline emission factors for all light-duty 
and passenger vehicles with baseline emission factors of comparable EVs. Emission 
factors should be taken from comparable EVs of the project proponent’s fleets or third-
party evidence, such as independent studies or market data. Alternatively, exclude all 
light-duty and passenger vehicles from the project activity from this date. 
• 
Example 2: Reduce overall GHG emissions from all vehicle fleets, including heavy-duty 
trucks and mobile machinery, by 50% by 2030 compared to the 2020 baseline. 
Guidance: Establish the 2020 baseline GHG emissions for all project vehicle fleets. 
From 2030 onwards, apply a cap of 50% of the 2020 baseline emissions of the project 
fleets when calculating baseline emissions in Equation (1). 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
15 
• 
Example 3: By 2040, all mobile machinery and trucks should use renewable fuels such 
as biodiesel, hydrogen, or renewable natural gas (RNG). 
Guidance: From 2040 onwards, exclude all mobile machinery and trucks from the 
project activity, since no further GHG emission reductions can be achieved for these 
vehicle fleets. 
• 
Example 4: Phase out fossil fuel consumption for mobile machinery by 2030 
Guidance: From 2030 onwards, replace the baseline emission factors for mobile 
machinery with non-fossil fuel baseline emission factors for mobile machinery that 
represent realistic alternatives for substitution of fossil fuels (e.g., electricity). 
Alternatively, exclude all mobile machinery from the project activity. 
8.2 
Project Emissions 
8.2.1 Project Emission Equations and Calculations 
Project emissions for all vehicle categories with or without telematics systems must be 
determined following the procedure below.  
𝑃𝐸𝑦= ∑
𝑃𝐸𝐹𝑖,𝑥 𝑜𝑟 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑦× 𝐴𝐿𝑖,𝑥,𝑦× 10−6
𝑖,𝑥
  
(4) 
Where:  
PEy 
= 
Project emissions in period y (t CO2) 
PEFi,x,y 
= 
Project emission factor of vehicle category i using fuel type x in period y 
(g CO2/activity level) 
PEFi,elec,y 
= 
Project emission factor of vehicle category i using electricity in period y 
(g CO2/activity level) 
For vehicles using fuel with or without telematics: 
𝑃𝐸𝐹𝑖,𝑥,𝑦= 𝑆𝐹𝐶𝑃𝐽,𝑖,𝑥,𝑦× 𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑥,𝑦  
(5) 
Where:  
SFCPJ,i,x,y 
= 
Specific project fuel consumption of vehicle category i using fuel type x in 
period y (fuel metric/activity level) 
For vehicles using electricity with or without telematics: 
𝑃𝐸𝐹𝑖,𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑦= 𝑆𝐸𝐶𝑃𝐽,𝑖,𝑦× 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑦× (1 + 𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑦)  
(6) 
Where:  
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
16 
SECPJ,i,y 
= 
Specific project electricity consumption of vehicle category i in period y 
(kWh/activity level) 
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
There are no leakage emissions associated with the project activity. 
8.4 
Net Reductions and Removals 
Net GHG emission reductions are calculated as follows: 
𝐸𝑅𝑦= 0.95 × (𝐵𝐸𝑦−𝑃𝐸𝑦)    
(7) 
Where: 
ERy 
= 
Net GHG emission reductions in year y (t CO2) 
0.95 
= 
Conservativeness deduction to account for uncertainties