7 ADDITIONALITY 
Additionality must be demonstrated following the procedures provided in the most recent 
version of AMS-III.BM, with Section 5.3.2, “Other activities,” paragraph 19 replaced by the 
following:2 
19.  Other activities that do not satisfy the conditions under paragraph 18 are considered 
additional if they comply with one of the following: 
a) For projects that classify as type 7 (introduction of e-bikes) with a market 
penetration of e-bikes among bicycles in use in the city below or equal to 1.5%. The 
market penetration is based on the number of annual bicycle trips undertaken in the 
city or based on the stock of bicycles. 
b) For projects that classify as type 7 (introduction of other two- or three-wheeled e-
vehicles) with a market penetration of other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles among 
other two- or three-wheeled vehicles in use in the city below or equal to 1.5%. The 
market penetration is based on the number of annual trips of other two- or three-
wheeled vehicles undertaken in the city or based on the stock of other two- or three-
wheeled vehicles. The market penetration must be assessed by comparing the 
project e-vehicle type with comparable vehicles.3  
c) For projects that classify as type 9 (introduction of e-bikes in business-oriented 
activities) with a market penetration of e-bikes among bicycles for business-oriented 
activities in use in the city below or equal to 1.5%. The market penetration is based 
on the number of annual bicycle trips undertaken in the city or based on the stock of 
bicycles for business-oriented activities. 
d) For projects that classify as type 9 (introduction of other two- or three-wheeled e-
vehicles) with a market penetration of other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles among 
other two- or three-wheeled vehicles for business-oriented activities in use in the city 
below or equal to 1.5%. The market penetration is based on the number of annual 
trips of other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles undertaken in the city or based on the 
stock of other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles for business-oriented activities. 
e) It is demonstrated, through the application of the most recent version of the CDM 
TOOL21 Demonstration of additionality of small-scale project activities or Step 2 of 
the VCS tool VT0008 Additionality Assessment,4 that at least one barrier would 
prevent the implementation of the project activity.  
 
2 Other options from AMS-III.BM. are not applicable. 
3 For example, e-motorcycles must be compared to conventional motorcycles, excluding bicycles and three-wheeled vehicles. 
4 The VCS tool VT0008 Additionality Assessment aims to align with ICVCM’s CCP requirements. If VT0008 is applied, all steps 
2a) to 2d) of the tool must be applied. 
 
VMR0013, v1.0 
 
8 
When assessing the investment barrier with TOOL21, the analysis must be 
conducted from the perspective of the bike parking area or bicycle-sharing station 
operator/investor. This includes assessing all relevant costs and revenues, such as: 
• 
Revenue from parking fees and other sources (e.g., advertising) 
• 
Costs for rent, maintenance, security, and personnel 
• 
Land-related expenses, including purchase price, opportunity cost, or fair 
market value