7 ADDITIONALITY 
In place of the additionality requirements 20 through 22 in the latest version of AMS-III.C, 
project proponents must demonstrate additionality by demonstrating regulatory surplus and 
applying either Option 1 (project method) or Option 2 (activity method) below. 
7.1 
Regulatory Surplus  
Project proponents must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements set out in the most recent versions of the VCS Standard and VCS Methodology 
Requirements. Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to 
Section 7.2 or Section 0. Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
7.2 
Option 1: Apply VT0008 Additionality Assessment 
Project proponents must apply a barrier analysis and/or investment analysis, and a common 
practice analysis as described below.  
 
VMR0014, v1.0 
 
7 
7.2.1 Barrier analysis and/or investment analysis  
Project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of the most recent version of 
VCS tool VT0008 Additionality Assessment to conduct either a barrier analysis (Step 2) or an 
investment analysis (Step 3). Project proponents may choose to apply both analyses to further 
strengthen the additionality demonstration.  
When applying a barrier analysis, barriers are limited to: 
1) Commercial/legal barrier: The “owner/tenant” contractual issue may be a barrier to the 
introduction of new electric and/or hybrid vehicles or EMMs. For example, this is typical in 
the case of car rental company fleets, where the car renter pays for the fuel and the 
owner makes the vehicle investment. Many taxi fleets are also managed in this manner, 
especially in developing countries, with taxi drivers paying a fixed daily rent per vehicle. 
For projects facing the commercial/legal barrier, project proponents must demonstrate 
that the contractual relationship between the parties does not provide an incentive for 
any party to implement the project activity. 
2) Aggregation barrier: In order to make the introduction of new electric and/or hybrid 
vehicles or EMMs feasible, an aggregation mechanism may be required. Aggregation 
parties are generally business associations, clean mobility-focused institutions, or 
providers of technology solutions. Establishing and maintaining such an aggregation 
mechanism can be a significant barrier that can be overcome with carbon credit 
revenues. 
Note — Projects may choose to demonstrate additional implementation barriers using the list of 
barriers provided in the most recent version of the VT0008 Additionality Assessment. However, 
as a minimum requirement, project proponents must demonstrate additionality through the 
existence of at least one of the barriers listed above or an investment analysis. Other barriers 
may further strengthen the additionality demonstration but are not sufficient on their own.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates that all conditions of either the barrier analysis 
and/or the investment analysis per VT0008 are met, proceed to Section 7.2.2 (common 
practice analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
7.2.2 Common practice analysis 
Project proponents must conduct a common practice analysis for each vehicle and EMM 
category in accordance with “Step 4c: Common Practice Analysis for Measures Not Listed in 
Step 4a” of the most recent version of VT0008. 
Where the project proponent demonstrates that the project is not considered common practice, 
the project is additional. Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
 
VMR0014, v1.0 
 
8 
7.3 
Option 2: Annual Sales  
Project proponents must apply Option 2 of AMS-III.C. The term “vehicles” must be read as 
“vehicles or mobile machinery” in this section. Where the project proponent demonstrates that 
the project meets the conditions in AMS-III.C. for annual sales, the project is additional. 
Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.