8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
Baseline emissions must be determined following the procedures provided in the most recent 
version of AMS-III.BM, with the inclusion of the procedures described below. 
Option 1: Ex-post survey of baseline travel modes 
Paragraphs (24), (25), (30), and (31) in Section 5.4 “Baseline Emissions” must read as follows: 
24. The vehicle categories index i indicated in Step 1 of TOOL18 shall be included, and 
“cycling” and “walking” should be considered as potential baseline “vehicle categories” 
with an emission factor of zero. If some vehicle categories are not explicitly identified or 
do not fit into the categories from the tool, they should be included in the survey as 
“others” and baseline emissions of this category are counted as zero. The survey shall 
be undertaken at locations of the project infrastructure and origin/destination of the 
cycling trip shall be substituted for “entry/exit station” in TOOL18. The survey may be 
conducted with a sample of users in the case of the bicycle sharing program or new 
tricycles, e-bikes, e-tricycles, or other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles. 
25. When applying Step 4 of TOOL18, the following provisions shall apply: 
… 
(b) Parameter Di may be determined  
(ii)  as an average value for bicycle, tricycle, e-tricycle, e-bike or other two- or 
three-wheeled e-vehicle trips (as relevant) from official data or studies at the 
city level; or 
(iii)  by applying the default conservative value of 2.5 km for bicycle or tricycle 
trips and 5 km for e-bike, e-tricycle, or other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles 
trips. 
 
VMR0013, v1.0 
 
9 
Where multiple data sources are available, the most conservative values must be applied 
unless a clear and well-documented justification is provided for using an alternative. 
Option 2: Baseline emissions based on public transportation (excluding cars, taxis and 
motorcycles) as benchmark 
The procedures and requirements in AMS-III.BM. must be applied for Option 2. 
Option 3: Based on a survey of users of e-bikes and users of bicycle sharing programs 
30. Under this option, the baseline emission factor is determined through a survey of users 
of e-bike or other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicle promotion programs or bicycle sharing 
programs (EFBL,CO2,survey) and the distance traveled will be monitored for each user of the 
programs (DTu,y). 
31. … 
Where: 
… 
DTu,y 
= Total distance travelled by the individual user u of the bicycle 
sharing program and/or of the promoted e-bikes and/or other 
two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles in year y (km) 
 EFBL,CO2 
= Average CO2 emission factor per passenger-kilometer based on 
survey conducted with users of e-bike and/or other two- or three-
wheeled e-vehicles promotion programs or bicycle sharing 
programs (tCO2/pkm) 
 
For the introduction of e-bikes and/or other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles in business-
oriented activities (project type 9), the following paragraph additions are applicable in AMS-
III.BM, Section 5.4 “Baseline emissions.” 
Option 4: Based on monitored users of e-bikes and/or other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles 
This option is applicable to project type 9. 
Under this option, the baseline emission factor is determined through the monitored data of 
trips before the start date of the project activity (EFBL,CO2) and the distance traveled for each 
user of the promoted programs (DTu,y). The monitored period considered for the determination 
of the baseline emission factor is one year prior to the start date of the project activity. If less 
than one full year of operational data is available, this option is not applicable. 
Baseline emissions are determined through the following equation: 
𝐵𝐸௬= 𝐸ܨ஻௅,஼ை2,௠௢௡௜௧௢௥ × ∑ܦܶ௨,௬
௨
 
(2a) 
 
VMR0013, v1.0 
 
10 
Where: 
BEy 
= Baseline emissions in year y (t CO2) 
DTu,y 
= Total distance traveled by the individual user u of the promoted e-
bikes and/or other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles in year y (km) 
EFBL,CO2,monitor 
= Average CO2 emission factor based on monitored trips prior to the 
start date of the project activity (t CO2/km) 
 
The average CO2 emission factor (EFBL,CO2) is determined using information from one year of 
monitored operation, prior to the start date of the project activity, applying the following steps: 
Step 1: Determine the relevant vehicle categories 
Only vehicles that are relevant to the business-oriented activities must be included. 
(a) Bicycles 
(b) Electric bicycles (e-bicycles, e-bikes) 
(c) Motorcycles 
(d) Electric motorcycles (e-motorcycles) 
(e) Tricycles 
(f) Electric tricycles (e-tricycles) 
(g) Other two- or three-wheeled vehicles 
(h) Other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles 
(i) On foot 
(j) Passenger cars 
(k) Other vehicle categories 
Step 2: Determine the emission factor per kilometer for each relevant vehicle category 
The parameter EFKM,i,x must be calculated using the most recent version of CDM TOOL18 
Baseline emissions for modal shift measures in urban passenger transport, step 2, with the 
following modifications: 
The baseline year corresponds to the 12-month period immediately preceding the project start 
date.  
Step 3: Determine the average baseline emission factor per kilometer 
For business-oriented activities the main objective of the personal transportation is the delivery 
of a product or a service. Therefore, a single passenger per trip is assumed in all trips, i.e., 
emission factor per passenger-kilometer is the same as the emission factor per kilometer. 
 
VMR0013, v1.0 
 
11 
𝐸ܨ஻௅,஼ை2,௠௢௡௜௧௢௥= ∑𝐸ܨ௄ெ,௜,௫× ܦܶ௜,0
ܦܶ0
௜
 
(2b) 
Where: 
EFBL,CO2,monitor 
= 
Average CO2 emission factor based on monitored trips prior to the start 
date of the project activity (t CO2/km) 
EFKM,i,x 
= 
Emission factor per kilometre of vehicle category i in year x (t CO2/km) 
DTi,0 
= 
Total distance travelled using vehicle category i in the baseline year (km) 
DT0 
= 
Total distance travelled in the baseline year (km) 
8.2 
Project Emissions  
Project emissions must be determined following the procedures provided in the most recent 
version of AMS-III.BM. applying the changes indicated in this section. 
32. Project emissions are determined based on the amount of electricity consumed to recharge 
the batteries of e-bikes, e-tricycles and other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles (ECPJ,y) using 
Equation (2) from VCS tool VT0010 Emissions from Electricity Consumption and 
Generation. 
33. The electricity consumed to recharge the batteries (ECPJ,y) may be determined by:  
(a) Directly measuring the electricity consumed by all e-bikes,e-tricycles, and other two- or 
three-wheeled e-vehicles included in the project; or  
(b) Assuming a default consumption ECi,default and determining the electricity consumed 
using the following equation: 5 
𝐸ܥ௉௃,௬= ∑∑𝐸ܥ௜,ௗ௘௙௔௨௟௧× ܦܶ௜,௨,௬
௨
௜
 
(3a) 
Where: 
ECPJ,y  
= Quantity of electricity consumed to recharge the batteries of e-bikes, e-tricycles, 
and other two- or three-wheeled e-vehicles in year y (kWh) 
ECi,default  = Default quantity of electricity consumed to recharge the batteries of e-vehicle i 
per kilometer traveled (kWh/km) 
 
5 For projects developed under baseline scenario option 1, DTi,u,y is determined following the provisions from AMS-
III.BM. Section 5.4.1, applying the updated procedures in Section 8.1. 
 
VMR0013, v1.0 
 
12 
DTi,u,y 
= Total distance traveled per e-vehicle i by the individual user u of the bicycle 
sharing program and/or of the promoted e-bikes, e-tricycles, or other two- or 
three-wheeled e-vehicles in year y (km) 
Project proponents may propose the default amount of electricity consumed for other two- or 
three-wheeled e-vehicles, based on transparent and documented evidence, including, but not 
limited to: 
(a) Relevant (sectoral) studies or surveys (e.g., market surveys, technology studies, etc.) 
undertaken by universities, research institutions, industry associations, companies, 
bilateral/multilateral institutions etc. 
(b) Relevant statistical data from national or international statistics 
(c) Written documentation of independent judgments from experts in industry, educational 
institutions (e.g., universities, technical schools, training centers), industry associations, 
and others 
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
Leakage emissions must be determined following the procedures provided in the most recent 
version of AMS-III.BM. 
8.4 
Net Reductions and Removals 
Estimated GHG emission reductions must be determined following the procedures provided in 
the most recent version of AMS-III.BM.