8 QUANTIFICATION OF REDUCTIONS 
AND REMOVALS 
8.1 
Baseline Emissions 
Baseline emissions must be determined following the procedures provided in the most recent 
version of AMS-III.AV., replacing the equations as indicated in the following: 
The following equation replaces Equation 1 of AMS-III.AV.: 
𝐵ܧ௬= ܹܳܲ௬× ݉× ܺ௕௢௜௟× ܵܧܥ
× ∑𝐵ܮ௙௨௘௟,௜× ((ܧܨ௕,௞,஼ை2 × ݂ேோ஻,௜,௬) + ܧܨ௕,௞,௡௢௡஼ை2) × 10−9 × ܣ݆݀௅ா
௜
 
 
(1) 
Where: 
BEy        
 =  Baseline emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
QPWy            =  Total quantity of water purified by the project in year y (L) 
m                  =  Fraction of functional appliances that are providing safe drinking water (%) 
Xboil               =  Fraction of the population served by the project activity for which the common 
practice of water treatment is or would have been water boiling; determined ex 
ante through surveys (dimensionless) 
SEC              =  Specific energy consumption required to boil one liter of water (kJ/L) 
BLfuel,i           =  Proportion of baseline fuel type i (non-renewable biomass and/or fossil fuels) 
used in the absence of the project activity (fraction) 
EFb,k,CO2       =  CO2 emission factor for fuel used by baseline device type k in the baseline 
scenario (t CO2/TJ) 
fNRB,i,y           =  Fraction of non-renewable fuel type i used in the absence of the project activity 
in year y; equal to 1 where the baseline fuel is fossil fuel (dimensionless) 
EFb,k,nonCO2   =  Non-CO2 emission factor for fuel used by baseline device type k in the baseline 
scenario (t CO2e/TJ) 
AdjLE             =  Adjustment factor to account for leakage related to non-renewable woody 
biomass saved by the project activity (dimensionless) 
 
The interaction between a Safe Drinking Water (SDW) system/device and improved thermal 
energy generation technologies (like improved cookstoves) in households/facilities must be 
taken into account when determining the level of baseline emissions. ηwb (efficiency of the water 
boiling systems being replaced) must be the weighted average based on the extent of usage of 
each boiling technology/device for drinking purposes per week. In other words, the proportion of 
times a household uses a specific technology/device to boil water for drinking purposes over a 
 
VMR0015, v1.0 
8 
week shall be applied as weights to the respective efficiencies of these boiling technologies for 
calculating ηwb3. 
8.2 
Project Emissions  
Project emissions must be determined following the procedures provided in the most recent 
version of AMS-III.AV.  
Paragraph 24 of AMS-III.AV. must be replaced as follows: 
24) PEEC,y must be calculated using the most recent version of VT0010 Emissions from 
Electricity Consumption and Generation. To estimate the amount of electricity 
consumption of water purification systems, the manufacturer’s specification of the 
equipment (e.g., electricity consumption per hour times utilization hours, electricity 
consumption per liters of water treated) may be used.   
8.3 
Leakage Emissions 
Projects must apply an adjustment factor to account for leakage related to the non-renewable 
woody biomass saved by the project activity (AdjLE). For simplification, the adjustment factor is 
included in the calculation of baseline emissions in Equation (1). Leakage emissions must be 
determined ex ante following the procedures provided in the most recent version of AMS-III.AV. 
8.4 
Net Reductions and Removals 
The net GHG emission reductions must be determined following the procedures provided in the 
most recent version of AMS-III.AV.