7 ADDITIONALITY 
This methodology uses a project method for the demonstration of additionality. Project 
proponents using this methodology must:  
1) Demonstrate regulatory surplus;  
2) Conduct an investment analysis and/or identify implementation barriers; and  
3) Demonstrate that the project activity is not common practice.  
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
9 
7.1 
Regulatory Surplus 
The project proponent must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent versions of the VCS 
Standard and VCS Methodology Requirements. 
The regulatory surplus must be assessed for each of the energy efficiency measures included 
in the project activity. 
7.2 
Investment Analysis and Implementation Barriers 
The project proponent must conduct either an investment analysis (Section 7.2.1) or a barrier 
analysis (Section 7.2.2). Project proponents may choose to apply both analyses to further 
strengthen the additionality demonstration. 
7.2.1 Investment Analysis 
When applying this step, project proponents must conduct an “investment comparison 
analysis” following the procedures and requirements of the “Investment Analysis” section of the 
most recent version of the VT0008 Additionality Assessment. The project scenario must be 
compared to the baseline scenario described in Section 6. 
7.2.2 Barrier Analysis 
When applying this step, project proponents must follow the procedures and requirements of 
the “Barrier Analysis” section of the most recent version of the VT0008 Additionality 
Assessment.  
Under this methodology, such barriers are limited to: 
1) Commercial/legal barrier: The “owner/tenant” contractual issue may be a barrier to 
implementation of energy efficiency measures in vehicles. For example, this is typical in 
the case of car rental company fleets, where the car renter buys the fuel and the owner 
makes the vehicle investment. Many taxi fleets are also managed in this manner, 
especially in developing countries, with taxi drivers paying a fixed daily rent per vehicle. 
The same is true in the case of leased vehicles typical in the trucking business. For 
projects facing the commercial/legal barrier, project proponents must demonstrate that 
the contractual relationship between the parties does not provide an incentive for any 
party to implement the project activity. 
2) Aggregation barrier: In order to make efficiency projects feasible, an aggregation 
mechanism may be required. Aggregation parties are generally business associations, 
efficiency-driven institutions, or providers of technology solutions for efficiency 
improvements. The cost of establishing and maintaining such an aggregation mechanism 
can be a significant barrier that can be offset with carbon credit revenues. 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
10 
Note — Projects may choose to demonstrate additional implementation barriers using the list of 
barriers provided in the most recent version of the VT0008 Additionality Assessment. However, 
as a minimum requirement, project proponents must demonstrate additionality through the 
existence of at least one of the barriers listed above or an investment analysis. Other barriers 
may further strengthen the additionality demonstration but are not sufficient on their own. 
7.3 
Common Practice 
The project proponent must demonstrate that the market penetration rate of each of the 
planned project measures is individually less than 20% for the types of vehicles included in the 
fleets. Penetration rates are assessed for the specific vehicle categories in which the measures 
are implemented, not for the entire fleet. Sources of data for market penetration rates may 
include independent studies, information from business associations, or other publicly 
available information.