3 DEFINITIONS 
In addition to the definitions set out in the VCS Program Definitions, the following definitions 
apply to this methodology. 
Activity level 
Index used to determine the output level of the vehicle (e.g., kilometers traveled) or mobile 
machinery (e.g., machine-hour or gross tonne-hour of the machine) 
Gross vehicle weight (GVW) 
Maximum allowable total weight of a vehicle when loaded, including fuel, passengers, and 
cargo, as specified by the vehicle manufacturer 
Measure 
Any equipment or device that reduces fuel or electricity consumption in vehicles while 
maintaining or enhancing the level of service. See Appendix 1 for detailed descriptions of 
applicable measures under this methodology. 
Mobile machinery 
A vehicle category consisting of equipment that is not fixed at a specific site but can be moved 
around either under its own power or with assistance when engineering specifications or 
logistics dictate (e.g., moving a loader using a low bed rather than driving the loader to the 
destination). Examples include stationary internal combustion generators, excavators, log 
harvesting bunchers, log loaders, cranes, timber processors, fork-lifters, road-building 
machines, and bulldozers. 
Telematics system 
Method of monitoring cars, trucks, equipment, and other assets by using global positioning 
system (GPS) technology and on-board diagnostics (OBD) to plot the asset's movements on a 
computerized map. By connecting to the OBD, telematics devices retrieve data generated by 
the vehicle, such as GPS position, speed, fuel usage, engine light information, and faults.  
 
1 This tool is currently under development and will be published shortly after the publication of this methodology 
2 This tool is currently under development and will be published shortly after the publication of this methodology 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
6 
Vehicle 
A motorized device used for the transportation of people, goods, or the performance of specific 
tasks. It includes both transport vehicles (e.g., cars, taxis, motorized tricycles, trucks, buses) 
and mobile machinery (e.g., excavators, cranes). 
Vehicle category 
The classification of motorized devices based on their design, purpose, and gross vehicle 
weight (GVW), including: 
1) Trucks with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) greater than 3.5 t; 
2) Trucks with a GVW equal to or less than 3.5 t; 
3) Buses with a GVW greater than 3.5 t; 
4) Taxis: significantly different taxi types (e.g., conventional cars, minibuses, jeepneys) 
must be considered as separate vehicle categories;  
5) Passenger cars (e.g., company cars, rental cars); 
6) Motorized tricycles (e.g., used as taxis or for deliveries); and 
7) Mobile machinery. 
Vehicle fleet 
A collection of multiple vehicles of the same vehicle category. Project vehicle fleets may use 
various fuel types. A fleet operator may have multiple fleets.