7 ADDITIONALITY 
Project proponents must demonstrate additionality through demonstration of regulatory surplus 
and either confirm that the project activity is on the positive list (activity method) or conduct an 
investment analysis and common practice analysis (project method), as outlined in Sections 7.1 
and 7.2 below.  
Paragraphs 21 and 25 of ACM0001 must be read as indicated in Section 6 in VMR0016.  
7.1 
Activity Method 
7.1.1 Regulatory Surplus 
The project proponent must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent versions of the VCS 
Standard and VCS Methodology Requirements.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to Section 7.1.2. 
Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
7.1.2 Positive List 
The project activity must meet all  the following conditions to qualify for the positive list: 
1) The project activity involves at least one of the following: 
a) landfill gas use for electricity generation with a total installed generation capacity 
that does not exceed 10 MW 
b) landfill gas use for on-site or off-site heat generation (without capacity limit) 
c) landfill gas flaring without any gainful use, where there is no source of revenue or 
cost savings other than the income derived from carbon credits 
 
VMR0016, v1.0 
7 
2) The project is not located in a high-income country, as defined by the World Bank, at the 
time the project is submitted for registration. 
3) Before the implementation of the project activity, the landfill gas: 
a) was vented and/or flared for at least three years or since the commissioning of the 
landfill, whichever is more recent (for brownfield projects). 
b) would have been vented and/or flared and not utilized for energy generation (for 
greenfield projects). 
4) The project does not receive any type of financial incentive (including financial revenues 
and savings), such as grants, tax exemptions, price subsides, or any other financial 
promotion mechanism from governments, multilateral funds, or other external entities, 
unless such incentives are explicitly contingent on the generation of carbon credits. 
Where the project activity meets all of the conditions above, it is additional.  
Where the project activity does not meet all of the conditions listed above, the project 
proponent must apply a project method (Section 7.2). Otherwise, the project activity is not 
additional. 
7.2 
Project Method 
7.2.1 Regulatory Surplus 
The project proponent must demonstrate regulatory surplus in accordance with the rules and 
requirements regarding regulatory surplus set out in the most recent versions of the VCS 
Standard and VCS Methodology Requirements.  
Where the project proponent demonstrates regulatory surplus, proceed to Section 7.2.2 
(investment analysis). Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
7.2.2 Investment Analysis 
The project proponent must follow the procedures and requirements in the most recent version 
of VT0009 to conduct an investment analysis. 
Where the project proponent meets the conditions of the investment analysis, proceed to 
Section 7.2.3. Otherwise, the project activity is not additional.   
7.2.3 Common Practice Analysis 
The project proponent must follow the procedures and requirements in the most recent version 
of VT0009 to conduct a common practice analysis. 
 
VMR0016, v1.0 
8 
 
Where the project activity is not considered common practice, it is additional. Otherwise, the 
project activity is not additional.