4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS 
This methodology applies to project activities that improve vehicle efficiency in fleets, resulting 
in reduced fuel usage and GHG emissions.  
This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
1) Project activities implement one or more of the following measures (see Appendix 1 for a 
description of each measure): 
a) Idling stop device 
b) Eco-drive system 
c) Tire-rolling resistance improvements 
d) Air-conditioning system improvements 
e) Use of low-viscosity oils 
f) 
Aerodynamic drag reduction 
g) Transmission improvements 
 
VMR0004, v2.0 
 
7 
h) Retrofits that improve engine or combustion efficiency or both 
i) 
Other energy efficiency improvements. Such other measures must have been 
demonstrated to lead to fuel savings in independent third-party studies. 
The measures implemented may vary across vehicles in the fleet(s). 
2) Where the project proponent is not the owner of the vehicle fleets (e.g., the project 
proponent is a fleet manager with many clients), a contract exists between the project 
proponent and each fleet owner to establish clear ownership of the emission reductions.  
3) Only vehicles in which at least one of the ex-ante-identified project activity measures has 
been implemented are included as project vehicles.  
4) A project activity may encompass various fleets. 
Note—The use of a fixed biofuel blend or plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) is permitted, 
provided that the project vehicles use the same biofuel blend or electricity-to-fuel ratio as the 
baseline vehicles.  
This methodology is not applicable under the following conditions: 
5) The measures improve fleet system efficiency, such as changes in operational 
procedures to increase vehicle occupancy rates or shifts in transportation modes. 
6) The project activities involve fuel switch activities. Project activities that introduce new 
electric or hybrid vehicles to replace fossil fuel vehicles may apply the CDM methodology 
AMS-III.C Emission Reductions by Electric and Hybrid Vehicles or other VCS-eligible 
methodologies for switching from fossil fuels to biofuels.